**Adaptive substance, creative regeneration: Mainstream science, repression, and
creativity**  

**"I intend to show you how neo-Darwinism has been invalidated within science
itself, as an explanation of how life on earth has evolved and is evolving. It
is nevertheless still perpetrated by the academic establishment, if only
because it serves so well to promote genetic engineering, a technology that
has the potential to destroy all life on earth. Furthermore, neo-Darwinism
reinforces a worldview that undermines all moral values and prevents us from
the necessary shift to holistic, ecological sciences that can truly regenerate
the earth and revitalize the human spirit."** Mae-Wan Ho
[http://www.i-sis.org.uk/paris.php](http://www.i-sis.org.uk/paris.php)

===========================  

More than 50 years have been wasted in one of the most important and
fundamental branches of science and medicine, for reasons that are highly
ideological and political. Rather than studying the regeneration of organs and
tissues, and recognizing its obvious importance in healing as well as in
understanding the nature of life, much of the last century was devoted to the
defamation of the researchers who were making real process in the field.
Despite many demonstrations that regeneration can occur in adult mammals,
students were taught that it happens only in lower vertebrates. I think it's
important to look closely at the ideology responsible for this great loss.

Warburg and Szent-Gyorgyi, in thinking about cancer, emphasized that growth is
the primordial function of all cells, and that the differentiated functions of
complex organisms involve restraints of that primitive function, imposed by a
system that has developed through time.

Seen with this orientation, regeneration is the spontaneous result of the
disappearance of restraint. The reproduction of a whole plant from a twig, or
clone, was a process known for thousands of years. Any part of the plant
contains the information needed for making a whole plant. More than thirty
years ago, cells from a tumor were added to the cells of a normal embryo, and
the animal that matured from the embryo-tumor mix was normal, and had traits
of both lineages, showing that the tumor cells had retained the genetic
information of a complete healthy organism, and just needed a different
environment in which to realize their full potential.

One of the currents of medical thinking, from classical times through
Paracelsus to homeopathy and naturopathy, has been a confidence in the
capacity of the organism to heal itself. But "modern" medicine has arrogated
to itself the "healing power," with terrible results, mitigated only by their
occasional reluctant acceptance of fragments of sane organismic thinking, such
as recognizing the importance of nutrition, or of keeping sewage out of the
drinking water. Research into methods to support the organism's natural
restorative powers has been ridiculed and suppressed.

We are immersed in the propaganda of modern medicine, and part of that
propaganda involves the confabulation of a history of science that supports
their practice and their ideology. The real history of science won't be found
in science textbooks.

"I intend to show you how neo-Darwinism has been invalidated within science
itself, as an explanation of how life on earth has evolved and is evolving. It
is nevertheless still perpetrated by the academic establishment, if only
because it serves so well to promote genetic engineering, a technology that
has the potential to destroy all life on earth. Furthermore, neo-Darwinism
reinforces a worldview that undermines all moral values and prevents us from
the necessary shift to holistic, ecological sciences that can truly regenerate
the earth and revitalize the human spirit." Mae-Wan Ho
[http://www.i-sis.org.uk/paris.php](http://www.i-sis.org.uk/paris.php)

Mainstream medical treatments are based on some fundamentally absurd
scientific ideas. The advent of experimental animal cloning and the
industrialization of genetic engineering have undercut the most important
biological doctrines of the 20th century, but the processes of critical
thinking haven't made headway against most of the traditional medical
stereotypes. Cloning shows that all cells are potential "stem cells," but this
fact co-exists with the Hayflick doctrine, that says, essentially, that no
cell is a stem cell.

The ideology of culturally significant "intellectuals"--scientists,
professors, neurobiologists, linguists, philosophers, oncologists, geneticists
--in the US is deeply influenced by the dualism and mechanistic materialism of
Rene DesCartes.

The denial that animals can think or understand language, the claim that
babies or animals don't feel pain, or that heart cells and brain cells can't
divide, or that somatic cells lack the genetic capacity to be cloned, or that
they are intrinsically mortal, limited to a maximum of 50 cell divisions--
these absurdities of 20th century biology and medicine all resulted from an
abject commitment to the mechanistic doctrine of matter and life promoted or
invented by DesCartes.

I doubt that DesCartes really invented anything, because, by the evidence of
his writing, he wasn't an intelligent man, but he placed himself politically
in such a way that his arguments were acceptable to many influential people,
and they continue to be acceptable to authoritarian and elitist factions even
today.

In the 16th and 17th century the cultures of England, Holland, and France were
increasingly dominated by business interests. People who had money to invest
wanted to see the world as an orderly, predictable place, and they found that
many of the ideas of the ancient Greeks were useful. Mathematics was needed to
calculate interest rates, insurance premiums, and, for the military, the
trajectories of missiles. In an orderly world, allowance for a little random
variation helped to save the perfection of the general rule.

In this environment, theological thinking began retrenching its doctrine, to
make it more acceptable to the increasingly powerful commercial people. The
clockwork universe of DesCartes' time, in which a perfect world that operated
according to perfect natural laws had been divinely created, gradually became
theologically acceptable during the 18th and 19th centuries. In the 18th
century, the Deists were the most famous embodiment of the idea, and then in
the 19th century their place was taken by the Catastrophists, who claimed that
the fossils which seemed to show evolutionary change of species actually
represented species that had been created along with those now existing, but
that had been destroyed by catastrophes, such as Noah's flood. By the end of
the 19th century, the president of an American university recognized that
theological compromises could prevent his undergraduates from rejecting
religion entirely, and forbade sermons against evolution.

There were many biologists who insisted that evolution of new species was
analogous to the development of an individual, and that both revealed an
adaptive capacity of the living substance. In this view, the adaptive growth
of an individual in a new environment revealed novel solutions to new
problems, and showed an innate inventiveness and intelligence in the process
of growth and adaptation. The appearance of new species was thought to
represent the same sorts of adaptive processes.

Erasmus Darwin (grandfather of Charles) was an evolutionist of this sort, but
because of political and theological pressure, he kept relatively quiet about
his beliefs. There was an underground culture, in which an evolutionary view
of the world was accepted, but these views were seldom published, because of
increasingly stringent censorship. Because of censorship, poetry, letters, and
diaries, rather than academic and scholarly works, give us the true picture of
18th century and early 19th century scientific culture.

The scientists who wanted their work to be acceptable to those in power found
ways to work with the Cartesian mechanical view of the world, building on the
Deists' compromise, which had succeeded in removing the supernatural from
nature. As the fossil evidence of evolution became inescapable, around the
time of Charles Darwin's work, those who wanted to bring evolution into the
mainstream of culture found that the Catastrophism of the creationists could
be adapted to their purposes, with only slight modification.

The doctrine of Thomas Malthus, who argued that war, famine, and disease were
beneficial for those who survived, by decreasing the competition for limited
resources, became a near equivalent to the catastrophic floods that the
creationists had invoked to explain the geological record that contained
evidence of many extinct animals. **The doctrine of Malthus, like that of the
Catastrophists, made loss, deletion, and destruction into a central device for
explaining the history of the world.**

Both of the Darwins had accepted the idea that many biological changes were
adaptive, rather than random, but the new practical compromise doctrine
introduced the idea that changes were just "random variations." The
essentially mechanical nature of the world was preserved, because "chance"
occurrences could be dealt with, and didn't involve anything supernatural.
**The function of the environment wasn't to add anything to life (that would
have been to assert that there were creative powers other than those of the
Creator), but simply to eliminate the inferior individuals that appeared as
the result of random changes.**

Gregor Mendel applied the principle of chance to explaining the inheritance of
certain traits, and showed that "traits" were passed on unchanged, even when
they weren't visible. His ideas were published and were acceptable to the
scientific mainstream of his time. Traits were determined by "factors" that
were passed on, unchanged, from parents, and biological variation was
explained by varied mixing of factors which in themselves were unaffected by
the organism or the environment. Genetic determinism was safely compatible
with creationism.

Shortly after Mendel's death, August Weismann began a campaign to put a stop
to the claims of those who, like the Darwins and Lamarck, saw adaptive
development of organisms as an essential part of the evolution of species.

Weismann was essentially a propagandist, and his first fame was the result of
"disproving" Lamarck by cutting the tails off more than 1500 mice, and
observing that their offspring were born with tails. The reason the
inheritance of acquired traits was impossible, he said, was that the "germ
line" was perfectly isolated from the rest of the organism. The differentiated
tissues of the body were produced by the selective loss of information from
the nuclei of cells in the embryo. The cells of the germ line were immortal
and contained all the information needed to produce an organism, but no other
cell of the organism was complete.

Complexity was produced by deletion, and this was the basis for arguing that,
if even the development of an individual was nothing but a passive unfolding
of inherited properties, much like unpacking a trunkful of clothes, then there
could be no adaptively acquired traits, and certainly no inheritance of
something which didn't exist. Changes in an individual were simply accidents,
such as having a tail amputated, and so the whole issue of the origin of
complexity was safely left to a primordial creation.

Weismann and his arguments were famous in Europe and the US, and formed the
background for the ideas known as neo-Darwinism. His "isolation of the germ
line" was the earliest version of the Central Dogma of molecular biology,
namely, that information flows only from DNA to RNA to protein. His doctrine,
of complexification through deletion, is the epitome of the greatest dogma of
modern times, expressed in doctrines from Catastrophism through the second law
of thermodynamics and the theory of the Big Bang, down to Hayflick's Doctrine
of the mortality of somatic cells. All these are consequences of the Cartesian
and Deistic separation of intelligence from matter.

Regeneration is one of the most vivid examples of the intelligence of living
substance.

Given a natural tendency of cells to multiply, the interesting thing about
regenerative healing is the question of why the new growth of tissue sometimes
differentiates to fit appropriately into its surroundings, but sometimes fails
to differentiate, becoming a tumor.

With aging, the regenerative process declines, and the process of tissue
rebuilding slows. Against a background of reduced regenerative ability, tissue
growth sometimes produces tumors, rather than renewed healthy tissue. When
tumors are grafted onto the amputated tail stump of a salamander, which has
good regenerative ability, the tumor is transformed into a tail, by its
envirornment, or morphogenic field. The "cancer problem" is essentially the
problem of understanding the organizing forces of the organism. The aging
problem is another aspect of the same problem.

Traditionally, biologists had studied anatomy, physiology, embryology or
development, and taxonomy or the classification of organisms. The growth of
knowedge early in the 20th century was suddenly seeming to confirm the
physiological, adaptive view of organisms that Lamarck had held. C.M. Child,
Joseph Needham, Alexander Gurwitsch, and L.V. Polezhaev were demonstrating the
primacy of a formative process in biology. Polezhaev and Vladimir Filatov were
studying practical means of stimulating regeneration as a medical technique.

Until the beginning of the second world war, the study of regeneration and the
pattern-forming processes in embryology were the liveliest parts of biological
research. Gestalt psychology was being developed at the same time, with a
similar emphasis on patterns and wholes.

But Weismannism and neo-Darwinism, largely embodied in the person of the
geneticist T.H. Morgan, deliberately set out to kill that line of biological
research. Gestalt psychology was similarly eliminated by the Behaviorists.

One of Morgan's closest associates, his student and colleague A.H. Sturtevant,
said that "Morgan's objectives, what he was trying to get at in general in his
biological work was to produce mechanistic interpretations of biological
phenomena. One of the things that irritated him most was any suggestion of
purpose in biological interpretation. He always had some reservations about
the idea of natural selection, because it seemed to him to open the door to
interpretations of biological phenomena in terms of purpose. He could be
talked into the conclusion that there was nothing that wasn't strictly
mechanistic about this interpretation, but he never liked it. And you had to
talk him into it again every few months." (Sturtevant, A. H., _Genetics, Vol.
159,_ 1-5, September 2001, Copyright 2001, Reminiscences of T. H. Morgan.)

Whatever his motives, Morgan was known to have prevented his students
(including C.M. Child) from publishing work that supported a holistic view of
the organism. After Morgan's death, there was an intense and widespread
campaign to suppress any approach to biology other than the "new synthesis,"
neo-Darwinism, with its doctrine of mechanistic genetic determinism and its
doctrine of random variation. A developmental biologist, J.M. Opitz (1985),
commented that **"in one of the most astounding developments in Western
scientific history, the gradient-field, or epimorphic field concept, as
embodied in normal ontogeny and as studied by experimental embryologists,
seems to have simply vanished from the intellectual patrimony of Western
biologists."** ****

Formative processes are necessarily multidimensional, and that makes
calculation and analysis very complex. To a great extent, the geneticists were
motivated to study bacterial genes, rather than vertebrate embryos, by the
principle that motivated the drunk to look for his car keys under the street
lamp, even though that wasn't where he lost them, because the light made it
easier to look there.

Bacteria are easy to study because they lack the complexity that makes it hard
to study an embryo or an animal. The language used in genetics textbooks shows
not only that bacteria are treated by geneticists as if they were one or two
dimensional, but that the concepts developed for bacterial genetics have been
extrapolated to use in describing complex organisms: " **Genes interact** to
establish the body axis in Drosophila. Homeotic **Genes control** pattern
formation along the anterior-posterior body axis." ( _Essentials of Genetics,_
M. Cummings and W. Klug, Prentice Hall, 2004.)

One of the basic distinctions in embryology is in the way the cells divide
after the egg is fertilized. Oysters and earthworms have spiral cleavage, sea
urchins and people have radial cleavage. Several decades ago an experimenter
was transferring a nucleus from an egg of an animal with radial cleavage, I
think a sea urchin, into the enucleated egg of a snail, with spiral cleavage.
The nucleus transplanted across such a great difference in phyla didn't
sustain maturation of the animal, but it did permit development to proceed for
several rounds of cell division, and the pattern of cell division, or
cleavage, and embryonic development always followed the pattern of the phylum
to which the egg cytoplasm belonged, never the pattern of the phylum from
which the nucleus was derived. The genes in the nucleus, obviously, weren't
directing the basic pattern formation of the embryo.

One-dimensional bacterial genetics can be used to "explain" multidimensional
systems, but it can't be expected to make useful predictions.

The idea of complexity, or of multidimensionality, has often been analyzed in
terms of "fields," by analogy with a magnetic field, as some property, or
properties, that extend beyond any individual part, giving some coherence to
the parts. Lamarck was concerned with understanding ensembles of particles and
cells, but in his time electricity and heat were the only principles that
physics provided that helped to illuminate the nature of living organisms. At
the end of the 19th century, though, the physicist J.C. Bose was noticing that
all of the properties of life that had interested Lamarck and Buffon--
irritability, sensation, contraction, memory, etc.--had their close analogs in
non-living substances. Bose, who invented the radio detector that was the core
of Marconi's apparatus, found that, in the presence of an electromagnetic
field, particles of a substance, such as finely powdered metal filings,
cohered into a unified whole. An otherwise invisible, undetectable "field"
which in Lamarck's time might have been known as one of the "subtle fluids,"
was able to organize a myriad of inert particles into a unified whole.

In the early 1920s, Bungenberg de Jong and A.I. Oparin showed how solutions of
organic substances could spontaneously organize themselves into complex
systems, with differentiated parts. A Russian embryologist, Alexander
Gurwitsch, found that the parts of an organ or embryo could exert their
stimulating or organizing influence on other cells even through a piece of
glass, and by using different types of filter, he identified ultraweak
ultraviolet rays as a medium of communication between cells. F.-A. Popp and
others are currently studying the integrating functions of ultraweak light
signals. Guenter Albrecht-Buehler (who has an interesting website called Cell
Intelligence) is investigating the role of pulsed infrared signals in cell
communication.

Electrical fields produced by cells, tissues, and organisms have been shown to
influence cellular metabolism and physiology, and to influence growth
patterns. Closely associated with cellular electrical fields are fields or
gradients of pH and osmolarity, and all of these fields are known to affect
the activity of enzymes, and so to create environments or fields of particular
chemical concentrations.

A phenomenon that was well known in the 1930s, when developmental fields were
still a familiar part of scientific discussion, was the "cancer field." Before
a cancer developed in a particular area, the area showed progessive changes,
away from normal function and structure, toward the cancer physiology.

In the embryonic state, damaged tissues regenerate quickly. The metabolism of
an embryo or fetus is highly oxidative, converting glucose rapidly to carbon
dioxide and water. Both carbon dioxide and water are important regulators of
cellular metabolism and function, and the concentrations of both of them
decrease systematically with maturity and aging. Both are involved with the
most basic aspects of cellular sensitivity, responsiveness, and organization.

To resume the scientific tradition that has "simply vanished," I think we have
to recover our ability to think about organisms generally, leaving aside as
many of the concepts of genetics as possible (such as "gene," "operon,"
"receptor"; "the gene" has never been more than an ideological artifact),
because they so often falsify the most important issues. The organization of
tissues and organs, and their functional properties, should be the focus of
attention, as they were for Lamarck around 1800, and for Johanes Muller, who
in 1840 saw cancer as a problem on the level of tissue, rather than cells. For
Lamarck, sensitivity and movement were the essential properties of the living
substance, and J. C. Bose showed reasons for believing that the
characteristics of life were built on related properties of matter itself.

Sensitivity, the ability to respond appropriately to the environment, is
probably a missing factor in the development of a tumor. The ability to become
quiescent, to quietly participate in the ensemble of cells, is an essential
feature of the sensitivity and responsiveness of the cells of complex
organisms. The factors that support organized appropriate functioning are the
factors that help cells to inhibit the excitatory state. If the keys of an
accordion or organ didn't spring back after the musician pressed them, the
instrument would be unplayable. In extreme physiological states, such as
epilepsy or malignant hyperthermia, nerves or muscles become incapable of
relaxing. Insomnia and muscle cramps are milder degrees of a defective
relaxation process. Excitoxicity and inflammation describe less generalized
cases of a similar process, in which there is an imbalance between excitation
and the restorative ability to stop the excitation. Prolonged excitation,
resulting in excessive fatigue, can cause a cell to disintegrate, in the
process of cell death called apoptosis, "falling away."

In the experiments of Polezhaev and Filatov, the products of cell
disintegration were found to stimulate the birth of new cells (possibly by
blocking a signal that restrains cell division). This process has been found
in every organ that has been examined appropriately. It amounts to a
"streaming regeneration" of the organism, analogous to the progressive
creation of Lamarck's view. G. Zajicek has demonstrated an orderly "streaming"
renewal in several organs, and even the oocytes (which in the Weismannian
dogma were formed at a very early stage during embryonic development, and were
perfectly isolated from the cells of the mature body) have recently been shown
to be continually regenerated in adult ovaries.

"Stem" cells turn out to be ubiquitous, and the failure of regeneration and
restoration seems to be situational. In the 1950s a magazine article described
the regeneration of a finger-tip when the wound was kept enclosed. Decades
later, friends (one a child, the other a man in his forties) had accidental
amputations of a finger-tip, down to the cuticle so that no visible nail
remained. The boy's mother fitted his finger with the tube from a ballpoint
pen, and the man used an aluminum cigar tube as his "bandage." Within a few
weeks, their fingers had regenerated to their normal shape and length. I think
the closed environment allows the healing tissues to be exposed to a high
concentration of carbon dioxide, in equilibrium with the carbon dioxide in the
capillaries, and to a humid atmosphere, regulated by the osmotic or vapor
pressure of the living tissues.

Under ordinary conditions, the creation of cells and the dissolution of cells
should be exactly balanced. The coordination of these processes requires a
high degree of coherence in the organism.

Simple increase of water in the vicinity of a cell increases its tendency to
multiply, as well as its excitability, and hypertonicity restrains cell
division, and reduces excitability. Carbon dioxide, besides helping proteins
to release water, appears to increase the ability of proteins and cells to
respond to morphogenetic fields. Carbon dioxide is the most universal agent of
relaxation, restoration, and preservation of the ability of cells to respond
to signals. Progesterone is another very general agent of restorative
inhibition.

The study of regeneration and "stem cells" is helping to illuminate the
general process of aging, and to provide very practical solutions for specific
degenerative diseases, as well as providing a context for more appropriate
treatment of traumatic tissue injury.

In aging, the growth and regenerative processes are slowed. There is some
evidence that even cell death is slower in old age, at least in some tissues.
Since animals with the highest metabolic rate live the longest, the slowing
rate of metabolism during aging probably accounts for those changes in the
rate of cell renewal. The continually streaming regeneration of tissues is
part of the adaptive process, and it is probably intensified by stress.

The ability to sleep deeply decreases in old age, as a generalized
inflammatory, excitatory state of stress develops. With progressive weakening
of restorative cellular relaxation (inhibition), cells become more susceptible
to disintegration. It's well established that bone loss occurs almost entirely
during the night, and since the catabolic hormones generally affect soft
tissues as well as bones, the atrophy of soft tissues ("sarcopenia") of aging
is also probably a process that occurs mostly during the night. Mediators of
inflammation are at their highest during the night (Cutolo and Masi, 2005).
But during the period of growth, the length of bones seems to increase mostly
during the night (Noonan, et al., 2004). My interpretation of this is that the
stress of darkness accelerates biological processes, whether the process is
mainly constructive or mainly destructive.

The effect of light supports efficient oxidative energy production, which
supports the protective inhibitory processes, by increasing ATP and CO2, and
decreases the inflammatory mediators that intensify stress. If organized
cellular luminescence is required for a proper balance, then the random
luminescence produced by lipid peroxidation (which may be more intense at
night--Diaz-Munoz, et al., 1985), might be an important factor in disrupting
the balanced streaming of regeneration. Free radicals, whatever their source,
absorb a broad spectrum of radiation, and would block luminous signals of all
frequencies. Isoprene, produced mainly at night (Cailleux and Allain, 1989),
is another ultraviolet absorber that might account for nocturnal regulatory
disorders.

The age pigment, lipofuscin, is known to contribute to degenerative diseases,
but the nature of its toxicity has never been established. Its absorptive and
fluorescent properties would be very likely to interfere with mitogenetic and
morphogenetic radiation. Polyunsaturated fats are the main component of
lipofuscin, and these fats in themselves can absorb ultraviolet light. When
those fats are present in the skin, exposure to ultraviolet light accelerates
the aging of the skin. Free fatty acids often increase during the night, under
the influence of hormones such as adrenaline and growth hormone.

A single night of poor sleep probably causes significant anatomical damage to
the streaming cellular systems that will be repaired over the next few days if
a high level of energy metabolism can be combined with a sufficient amount of
deep sleep. The things that optimize energy and sleep form the background for
supporting the restorative processes. Salt, glycine, carbon dioxide,
progesterone, thyroid hormone and sugar all contribute to preserving the
organism's energetic reserves by reducing inappropriate excitation.

Lamarck's idea that organs developed or regressed according to their use or
disuse was often attacked by followers of the Weismann-Morgan genetic dogma.
In their view, the influence of the environment was limited to either
preventing or permitting the realization of "the genetic potential." Once that
predefined potential had been unfolded, the finite and mortal nature of the
somatic cells didn't allow for any significant changes, except for depletion
and death. One of the high points of Weismannian biology came with the
publication of an article in Science, around 1970, that proposed to explain
learning in terms of the lifelong loss of brain cells, beginning in humans
around the age of 18 months, with a daily loss of 100,000 cells, which would
record experience by selective deletion, the way punching holes in cards had
been used to enter data into computers. I was present to witness "world class
biologists" taking that idea very seriously.

As Sturtevant mentioned in the quotation above, T.H. Morgan couldn't accept
any attribution of purposefulness to organisms. In his genetic dogma, changes
were only random, and people who denied that were denounced as "teleological"
(or metaphysical) thinkers. Changes occurred by deletion, not by meaningful
addition.

One of Pavlov's students, P.K. Anokhin, developed the concept of the
Functional System in the 1930s, to explain the purposive behavior of animals.
In the 1950s, Anokhin integrated the endocrinology of stress and adaptation
into the concept, and F.Z. Meerson continued the work, concentrating on the
metabolic and structural changes that protect the heart during stress. The
simplest view of the conditional reflex involves the adaptation of an animal
to an external signal, identifying it as the occasion for a particular action.
Analyzing the Functional System starts with the need of the animal, for
example for food, and examines the processes that are involved in satisfying
that need, including nerve cells, a sense of hunger, knowledge of what things
are edible, the muscles needed to get the food, and the digestive apparatus
for assimilating it.

When an understanding of stress physiology is combined with the idea of
functional systems, the adaptive meaning of the use or disuse of certain
organs is given a concrete basis. Cortisol mobilizes amino acids from muscles
that are idle, and makes them available for the synthesis of proteins in the
muscles, nerves, or glands that are activated in adapting to the stress. The
London taxi drivers whose hippocampus grows as they learn the locations of the
streets are very good examples of the processes described by Meerson, Anokhin,
and Lamarck, in which the use of an organ in meeting a need contributes to the
development of that organ. The balance between growth and regression is
shifted during adaptive behavior.

Exercise physiologists, without mentioning functional systems, have recently
discovered some principles that extend the discoveries of Meerson and Anokhin.
They found that "concentric" contraction, that is, causing the muscle to
contract against resistance, improves the muscle's function, without injuring
it. (Walking up a mountain causes concentric contractions to dominate in the
leg muscles. Walking down the mountain injures the muscles, by stretching
them, forcing them to elongate while bearing a load; they call that eccentric
contraction.) Old people, who had extensively damaged mitochondrial DNA, were
given a program of concentric exercise, and as their muscles adapted to the
new activity, their mitochondrial DNA was found to have become normal.

There are probably the equivalents of constructive "concentric" activity and
destructively stressful "eccentric" activity in the brain. For example, "rote
learning" is analogous to eccentric muscle contraction, and learning by asking
questions is "concentric." "No bird soars too high, if he soars with his own
wings." Any activity that seems "programmed" probably stifles cellular energy
and cellular intelligence.

When activity is meaningful, and is seen to be meeting a felt need, the
catabolic and anabolic systems support and strengthen the components of the
functional system that has been activated. Everything we do has an influence
on the streaming renewal of the adaptive living substance.

There are many therapeutic techniques that could be improved by organized
research, for example, investigating the interactions of increasing carbon
dioxide, reducing atmospheric pressure, supplementing combinations of salt and
other minerals, balancing amino acids and sugars, and varying light exposure
and types of activity. The dramatic results that have occasionally been
demonstrated (and then suppressed and forgotten) are just a hint of the
possibilities.

If we keep our thoughts on the living substance, the pervasive ideologies lose
their oppressive power.

  
REFERENCES

Chronobiol Int. 2004;21(6):937-47. **Postprandial metabolic profiles following
meals and snacks eaten during simulated night and day shift work.** Al-Naimi
S, Hampton SM, Richard P, Tzung C, Morgan LM. "We have previously shown that
both simulated and real shift workers showed relatively impaired glucose and
lipid tolerance if a single test meal was consumed between 00:00-02:00 h
(night shift) compared with 12:00-14:00 h (day shift). The objective of the
present study was to extend these observations to compare the cumulative
metabolic effect of consecutive snacks/meals, as might normally be consumed
throughout a period of night or day shift work." "There was a trend toward an
effect of shift for plasma glucose, with higher plasma glucose at night (p =
0.08), and there was a time-shift interaction for plasma insulin levels (p <
0.01). NEFA levels were unaffected by shift." "These findings confirm our
previous observations of raised postprandial TAG and glucose at night, and
show that sequential meal ingestion has a more pronounced effect on subsequent
lipid than carbohydrate tolerance."

Anokhin P.K. **_System mechanisms of higher nervous activity._** Moscow,
Nauka, 1979. (In Russian).

Life Sci. 1989;44(24):1877-80. **Isoprene and sleep.** Cailleux A, Allain P.
Isoprene is one of the main constituents of endogenous origin in exhaled human
breath. The concentration of isoprene seems to vary with states of sleep and
wakefulness, **increasing during sleep and decreasing sharply just after
awakening.** Thus, isoprene may be involved in in sleep upholding.

Exp Neurol. 1978 May 15;60(1):41-55. Evidence of normal mitosis with complete
cytokinesis in central nervous system neurons during sustained depolarization
with ouabain. Cone CD Jr, Cone CM.

Nat New Biol. 1973 Nov 28;246(152):110-1. Stimulation of DNA synthesis in CNS
neurones by sustained depolarisation. Stillwell EF, Cone CM, Cone CD Jr.

J Natl Cancer Inst. 1971 Mar;46(3):655-63. Intercellular transfer of toxic
components after laser irradiation. May JF, Rounds DE, Cone CD.

J Theor Biol. 1971 Jan;30(1):151-81. **Unified theory on the basic mechanism
of normal mitotic control and oncogenesis.** Cone CD Jr.

Oncology. 1971;25(2):168-82. **Control of somatic cell mitosis by simulated
changes in the transmembrane potential level.** Cone CD Jr, Tongier M Jr.

Acta Cytol. 1969 Oct;13(10):576-82. **Autosynchrony and self-induced mitosis
in sarcoma cell networks.** Cone CD Jr.

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1980;339:115-31. **Ionically mediated induction of
mitogenesis in CNS neurons.** Cone CD Jr.

Science. 1976 Apr 9;192(4235):155-8. **Induction of mitosis in mature neurons
in central nervous system by sustained depolarization.** Cone CD Jr, Cone CM.
DNA synthesis and mitosis have been induced in vitro in fully differentiated
neurons from the central nervous system by depolarization with a variety of
agents that produce a sustained rise in the intracellular sodium ion
concentration and a decrease in the potassium ion concentration.
Depolarization was followed in less than 1 hour by an increase in RNA
synthesis and in 3 hours by initiation of DNA synthesis. Apparently normal
nuclear mitosis ensued, but cytokinesis was not completed in most cells; this
resulted in the formation of binucleate neurons. The daughter nuclei each
contained the same amount of DNA as the diploid preinduction parental neurons;
this implies that true mitogenic replication was induced.

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1974;238:420-35. **The role of the surface electrical
transmembrane potential in normal and malignant mitogenesis**. Cone CD Jr.

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1974;238:451-6. **Panel discussion: The role of electrical
potential at the cellular level in growth and development.** Becker RO, Cone
CD, Jaffe LF, Parsegian VA, Pohl HA, Weiss L.

J Cell Physiol. 1973 Dec;82(3):373-86. **Contact inhibition of division:
involvement of the electrical transmembrane potential.** Cone CD Jr, Tongier M
Jr.

J Theor Biol. 1971 Jan;30(1):183-94. **Maintenance of mitotic homeostasis in
somatic cell populations.** Cone CD Jr.

Oncology. 1970;24(6):438-70. **Variation of the transmembrane potential level
as a basic mechanism of mitosis control.** Cone CD Jr.

Trans N Y Acad Sci. 1969 Apr;31(4):404-27. **Electroosmotic interactions
accompanying mitosis initation in sarcoma cells in vitro.** Cone CD Jr.

Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2005 Feb;31(1):115-29, ix-x. **Circadian rhythms and
arthritis.** Cutolo M, Masi AT.

Neuroscience. 1985 Dec;16(4):859-63. **Day-night cycle of lipid peroxidation
in rat cerebral cortex and their relationship to the glutathione cycle and
superoxide dismutase activity.** Diaz-Munoz M, Hernandez-Munoz R, Suarez J,
Chagoya de Sanchez V. Lipoperoxidation, glutathione cycle components and
superoxide dismutase activity show a day-night rhythm in the cerebral cortex
of the rat. **The highest lipoperoxidative activity is observed during the
night (20.00-04.00 h).** The enhancement in lipoperoxidation occurs
concurrently with a decrease in glutathione peroxidase activity, an increase
in superoxide dismutase activity and an increase in the double bonds in the
brain cortex lipid fraction. The changes described in this paper seem to be
related to a succession of light and dark periods, or to fasting and feeding
periods. We propose that those fluctuations could act as a physiological
oscillator with an important role in modulating the membrane properties of the
nerve cell.

Brain Res. 1977 Mar 4;123(1):137-45. **Daily variations of various parameters
of serotonin metabolism in the rat brain.** **II. Circadian variations in
serum and cerebral tryptophan levels: lack of correlation with 5-HT
turnover.** Hery F, Chouvet G, Kan JP, Pujol JF, Glowinski J. Rats submitted
to regular 12 h cycles of light and darkness for three weeks were sacrificed
at various times of the day. 5-HT, 5-HIAA and tryptophan levels were estimated
in the fronto-parietal cerebral cortex. Tyrosine and free and total tryptophan
levels in serum were estimated in parallel. Significant circadian variations
in 5-HT and 5-HIAA levels were found in cerebral tissues. The peaks of 5-HIAA
levels were dectected during the lignt and dark periods respectively, the
maximal fluctuations being seen between 17.00 h and 21.00 h, two times
separating the light off. Important significant circadian variations in free
and total **serum tryptophan** levels were also observed **. In both cases,
the maximal levels were found during the middle of the dark phase** after the
peak of 5-HIAA levels. The circadian rhythm of tyrosine levels in serum was in
opposite phase with that of tryptophan (free or total). The diurnal changes in
tryptophan content in cerebral tissues seemed thus related to those found in
serum. Taking in consideration results obtained in previous studies 16,17
carried out in similar experimental conditions, it was concluded that the
parallel increase in serum free tryptophan and in tissues 5-HIAA levels seen
during the night were not related to a stimulation of 5-HT turnover. Indeed
5-HT synthesis is minimal at this time16.

Kryukov V.I. **An attention model based on the principle of dominanta** **//
_Proceedings in Nonlinear Science. Neurocomputers and Attention. I:
Neurobiology, Synchronization, and Chaos._** 1989\. Ed. by A.Y. Holden and
V.I. Kryukov, pp. 319-351.

Endocrinol Exp. 1976 Jun;10(2):131-7. **Diurnal variation in the effect of
melatonin on plasma and muscle free fatty acid levels in the pigeon.** John
TM, George JC. Pigeons maintained on standard diet and held under 12 h daily
photo-period in a controlled environmental room, were given intravenous
injections of melatonin. A low dose (1.25 mg/kg body weight) of melatonin when
given in the middle of the scotophase, produced a significant increase in
plasma FFA when estimated at 20 min and 90 min post-injection, whereas no
significant change was seen with injections given in the middle of the
photophase. No significant change in muscle FFA level was obtained either
during the photophase or the scotophase when estimated at 90 min
postinjection. **With a higher dose (5 mg/kg body weight) of melatonin given
in the scotophase, on the other hand, a significant increase in both plasma as
well as muscle FFA levels was obtained at 90 min post-injection but there was
no effect on plasma FFA at 20 min or 90 min** post-injection in the photophase
and at 20 min in the scotophase. It is concluded that **melatonin has a lipid
mobilizing action in the pigeon when administered during the scotophase.**

Exp Brain Res. 2001 Feb;136(3):313-20. **Enhanced neurogenesis after transient
global ischemia in the dentate gyrus of the rat.** Kee NJ, Preston E,
Wojtowicz JM. "Certain insults such as epileptic seizures and ischemia are
known to enhance the rate of neuronal production. We analyzed this phenomenon
using the temporary occlusion of the two carotid arteries combined with
arterial hypotension as a method to induce ischemia in rats. We measured the
rate of cell production and their state of differentiation with a mitotic
indicator, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), in combination with the
immunohistochemical detection of neuronal markers. One week after the ischemic
episode, the cell production in dentate gyrus was increased two- to threefold
more than the basal level seen in control animals. **Two weeks after ischemia,
over 60% of these cells became young neurons as determined by colabeling with
BrdU and a cytoplasmic protein (CRMP-4) involved in axonal guidance during
development. Five weeks after the ischemia, over 60% of new neurons expressed
calbindin, a calcium-binding protein normally expressed in mature granule
neurons.** In addition to more cells being generated, a greater proportion of
all new cells remained in the differentiated but not fully mature state during
the 2- to 5-week period after ischemia." "The results support the hypothesis
that survival of dentate gyrus after ischemia is linked with enhanced
neurogenesis. Additional physiological stimulation after ischemia may be
exploited to stimulate maturation of new neurons and to offer new therapeutic
strategies for promoting recovery of neuronal circuitry in the injured brain."

Am J Cardiol. 1998 Dec 17;82(12A):24U-28U; discussion 39U-41U. **Clinical
profiles of plain versus sustained-release niacin (Niaspan) and the
physiologic rationale for nighttime dosing.** Knopp RH. Niacin is the oldest
and most versatile agent in use for the treatment of dyslipidemia. It has
beneficial effects on low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol; the apolipoproteins B and A-I constituting these
fractions; triglyceride; and lipoprotein(a). Together, these benefits lead to
a diminished incidence of coronary artery disease among niacin users. The
chief constraints against niacin use have been flushing, gastrointestinal
discomfort, and metabolic effects including hepatotoxicity. Time-release
niacin has been developed in part to limit flushing, and now a nighttime
formulation (Niaspan) has been developed that assists in containing this
untoward effect. In a pivotal metabolic study, bed-time administration of 1.5
g time-release niacin was shown to have the same beneficial effects as 1.5 g
plain niacin in 3 divided doses and to be well tolerated. **Previous studies
suggest that bedtime niacin administration diminishes lipolysis and release of
free fatty acids** to the liver; this, in turn, leads to an abolition of the
usual diurnal increase in plasma triglyceride, which may result in diminished
formation and secretion of triglyceride in the very-low-density lipoprotein
fraction.

J Pediatr Orthop. 2004 Nov-Dec;24(6):726-31. **Growing pains: are they due to
increased growth during recumbency as documented in a lamb model?** Noonan KJ,
Farnum CE, Leiferman EM, Lampl M, Markel MD, Wilsman NJ.

Cell Tissue Kinet. 1977 Nov;10(6):557-68. **Circadian rhythms of presumptive
stem cells in three different epithelia of the mouse.** Potten CS, Al-Barwari
SE, Hume WJ, Searle J.

Physiol Res. 1995;44(4):249-56. **Circadian and circaannual oscillations of
tissue lipoperoxides in rats.** Solar P, Toth G, Smajda B, Ahlers I, Ahlersova
E. Circadian and circaannual oscillations of tissue lipid peroxides (LPO) were
studied in young male Wistar rats. The concentration of malondialdehyde, one
of LPO degradation products, was measured at 3-h intervals during 24 hours in
rats, adapted to light:dark 12:12 h regimen in the course of the year. LPO in
the liver, thymus and bone marrow oscillated rhythmically in the course of the
day and year. Circadian oscillations in all tissues were two-peaked, with
zeniths at various times of the light and dark parts of the day. In the liver
and thymus, **the highest mesors were found during the winter** , in the bone
marrow during the spring. The same holds for amplitude values, with the
exception of the bone marrow which exhibited the highest values during the
summer. The reason for the LPO oscillations is probably resulting from the
changing ratio of pro- and anti-oxidative capacities in various tissues during
the day and the year.

Biofizika. 1976 Jul-Aug;21(4):688-91. **[Circadian rhythms of ultraweak
chemiluminescence of bean roots]** Sul'tsman FM, Petrusevich IuM, Tarusov BN.
Circadian rhythms of ultra-weak chemoluminescence of bean roots were
investigated. It was found that under periodical change of light and darkness
and without subsequent illumination a periodical change of spontaneous
chemoluminescence of bean roots was observed. (The study of antiradical
activity of the substances extracted from the root showed the dependence of
this activity on illumination conditions.

Ukr Biokhim Zh. 1977 Sep-Oct;49(5):64-9. [Effect of "carbostimulin", vitamin D
3 and their mixture on bone tissue regeneration] [Article in Ukrainian] Taran
TT, Guly MF, Mykhajlovskyj VO, Dvornykova PD, Fanak MM, Vorobjov NA. "Healing
of the bone injury in rabbits was studied as affected by carbostimulin and its
mixture with vitamin D3. Some biochemical indexes: the content of sialic
acids, calcium and citric acid in blood serum of the animals, intensity of 14C
incorporation from NaH14CO3 into the regenerated bone tissue and its proteins
as well as histological studies, data, evidence for a positive effect of the
mentioned preparations on the bone substance regeneration in the animals under
experiment."

Biofizika. 1961;6(4):490-2. **[Study on ultra-weak spontaneous luminescence of
animal cells.]** Tarusov BN, Polivoda AI, Zhuravlev AI.

Biofizika. 1961;6(4):83-5. **Study of the faint spontaneous luminescence of
animal cells.** Tarusov BN, Polivoda AI, Zhuravlev AI.

Vopr Med Khim. 1977 May-Jun;(3):375-81. **[Free fatty acids and cholesterol as
possible participants in lipid oxidation radical reactions in animal
tissues]** [Article in Russian] Terekhova SF, Burlakova EB, Elizarova TI.
Alterations in concentration of free fatty acids, free cholesterol, native
antioxidants as well as in the antioxidative activity were studied in lipids
of mice liver tissue and small intestinal mucosa. The intensity of free
radical reactions in lipids of animal tissues was affected directly by
administration of synthetic inhibitors of the reactions. The inverse
correlation was observed between the alteration in concentrations of native
antioxidants and free fatty acids as well as between the antioxidative
activity of lipids and amount of free cholesterol in them. **Free fatty acids
appears to be the constant participants in the system of free radical
oxidation of lipids, while cholesterol can center the system under distinct
level of these reactions intensity.**

Ukhtomsky A.A. **_Dominanta as factor of behavior // Collected works._**
Leningrad, 1950. Vol.1, pp.293-315.

Biofizika. 1974 Mar-Apr;19(2):295-9. **[Formation of pigments of lipid nature
in animal tissues during neoplastic growth and irradiation]** Vertushkov VT,
Ivanov II, Tarusov BN.

Biofizika. 1967 Jul-Aug;12(4):739-41. **[Antioxidative activity of blood serum
fractions during malignant degeneration studied by inhibition of
chemiluminescence]** Zakarian AE, Tarusov BN.

Biofizika. 1966;11(5):919-21. **[Inhibition of chemiluminescence of the blood
plasma in malignant growth]** [Article in Russian] Zakarian AE, Tarusov BN.

