**Aging Eyes, Infant Eyes, and Excitable Tissues**  


The eyes and the lungs are sensitive tissues that are easily harmed by
inappropriate environmental exposure. They are especially sensitive in infancy
and old age.

For 60 years there have been controversies about the cause of retinopathy of
prematurity, which has blinded tens of thousands of people.

Degeneration of the retina is the main cause of blindness in old people.
Retinal injury is caused by ordinary light, when the eyes are sensitized by
melatonin, prolactin, and polyunsaturated fats. Bright light isn't harmful to
the retina, even when it is continuous, if the retina isn't sensitized.

Melatonin and prolactin are induced by stress, and darkness is a stress
because it impairs mitochondrial energy production.

The polyunsaturated fats which accumulate in the brain and retina damage
mitochondria.

Iron, which accumulates prenatally, and then again with aging, reacts with
unsaturated fats during stress to destroy cells.

The popular supplements melatonin, tryptophan, fish oils, St. John's wort, and
the various omega -3 oils, all increase the risk of retinal light damage and
macular degeneration. Serotonin uptake inhibiting antidepressants are
suspected to be able to cause it.

Processes similar to those that damage the over-sensitized retina can occur in
other cells, as a result of stress. The substances that sensitize the retina
to light-damage, can also increase the incidence of new or metastatic cancers.

Iron supplements and the use of supplemental oxygen, especially with a vitamin
E deficiency exacerbated by excessive unsaturated fats in the diet, are still
commonly used exactly when they can do the most damage.

_

* * *

One of the recognized achievements of biology has been the demonstration of
lifes universality, in the sense that organisms of all sorts use the same
fundamental genetic code, and that yeasts, lizards, apes, and people have
remarkably similar cellular systems, as well as a great amount of genetic
similarity.

There has been another, less well recognized, sort of convergence going on in
physiology and pathophysiology. Hans Selyes concept of stress, the syndrome
of being sick, Otto Warburgs argument that a respiratory defect was behind
all kinds of cancer, and the idea of free radical damage as a common factor in
disease and aging, helped to create a more general way of looking at the
nature of disease that superceded medicines theories of disease pathogens and
genetic mutations, which created thousands of disease entities, none of
which had much to do with the individuality of the patient or his environment.

The understanding that plants and animals have much biochemistry in common has
gradually changed the assumptions of the science establishment, which until
recently insisted that only ionizing radiation could affect animals or other
organisms that lacked chlorophyll--and insisted that ionizing rays acted only
on the DNA. Visible light, the textbooks said, was not chemically active,
and so couldnt possibly affect animals cells. In animals, coloration was
seen mainly as decoration and disguise, rather than as a functional part of
their biochemistry.

(Chemically, the meaning of a pigment is that its a chemical which
selectively absorbs radiation. **Old observations such as Warburgs, that
visible light can restore the activity of the respiratory pigments, showed
without doubt that visible light is biochemically active.** By the 1960s,
several studies had been published showing the inhibition of respiratory
enzymes by blue light, and their activation by red light. The problem to be
explained is why the science culture simply couldnt accept crucial facts of
that sort.)

The retina, of course, was allowed (in the views of mainline science) to
respond to ordinary light, but the few people who studied the biological
effects of seasonal or daily cycles of light have until recently stayed very
close to the nerve pathways leading from the retina to the pineal gland,
because those pathways could be described in terms of an evolutionarily
specialized third eye. Even with a doctrine of a genetically specialized
link between the retina and a little of the animals physiological chemistry,
the great, slow-witted science establishment has done its best to avoid
thoughts of any deep interaction between an organism and its environment, by
insisting that the organism runs according to a genetically determined clock
which is located in a few cells in a certain area of the brain, and that
nervous impulses from the retina have only the small privilege of setting the
clock.

It didnt matter to the academic and medical worlds that a professor, Frank A.
Brown, had long ago disproved the idea of an innate genetic clock, because
philosophy is much stronger than evidence. Leibniz had said that everything in
the world runs on its own inner clock, without needing to perceive its
surroundings, and this idea that everything in the world is a windowless
monad resonated through the world of science, because it justified the
pompous authoritarian attitudes of the experts who knew that anything that
wasnt already in their heads couldnt be considered knowledge. **If an
organisms essence is contained in its genes, then it clearly doesnt
interact in any meaningful way with most of its environment.** This is the
sort of culture that imbued research on the biology of light cycles.

When I moved from Mexico, first to Montana and then to Oregon in 1966, I
became very conscious of how light affects the hormones and the health. (For
example, in Montana I experienced an interesting springtime shedding of body
hair.) Many people who came to cloudy Eugene to study, and who often lived in
cheap basement apartments, would develop chronic health problems within a few
months. Women who had been healthy when they arrived would often develop
premenstrual syndrome or arthritis or colitis during their first winter in
Eugene.

The absence of bright light would create a progesterone deficiency, and would
leave estrogen and prolactin unopposed. Beginning in 1966, I started calling
the syndrome winter sickness, but over the next few years, because of the
prominence of the premenstrual syndrome and fertility problems in these
seasonally exacerbated disorders, I began calling it the pathology of estrogen
dominance. In the endocrinology classes I taught at the National College of
Naturopathic Medicine, I emphasized the importance of light, and suggested
that medicine could be reorganized around these estrogen-related processes. If
the sparrows of Times Square mated in the winter because of the bright lights,
it seemed clear that bright artificial light would be helpful in regulating
human hormones.

In our lab at the University of Oregon, our hamsters would try to hibernate,
even though they were in temperature-controlled laboratories with regular
cycles of artificial light. (The ceiling lights provided only dim illumination
inside their cage boxes, so they were probably in a chronic state of light
deprivation, which probably increased their sensitivity to the weak
environmental cues that Frank Brown had investigated, possibly microwaves that
easily penetrated the lab walls.) During the winter, when they were infertile,
I found that their thymus glands practically disappeared. The mechanism seemed
to include the increase of pineal gland activity (probably increasing
melatonin synthesis) in the winter, under the intensified activity of the
sympathetic nervous system (with increased activity of adrenalin and other
catecholamines), and the melatonin was apparently a signal for suppressing
fertility during the stressful winter. In some animals (Shvareva and
Nevretdinova, 1989), estrogen is increased during hibernation, contributing to
the reduction of body temperature.

In 1994 A.V. Sirotkin found that melatonin inhibits progesterone production
but stimulates estrogen production, and its widely recognized that melatonin
generally inhibits the thyroid hormones, creating an environment in which
fertilization, implantation, and development of the embryo are not possible.
This combination of high estrogen with low progesterone and low thyroid
decreases the resistance of the organism, predisposing it to seizures and
excitotoxic damage, and causing the thymus gland to atrophy.

Cyclical exposure to melatonin can have an effect on the reproductive system
opposite to that of chronic exposure, and the way exogenous melatonin is
delivered to the animal can have unexpected effects on the actual amount of
melatonin circulating in the blood (Wright and Alves, 2001). The actual amount
of melatonin in the tissues, its relation to the normal cycling of the animal,
and the influence of temperature, are often disregarded in melatonin research,
making it hard to interpret many of the publications.

There is a lot of talk about melatonins function as an antioxidant, but, like
so many other antioxidants, melatonin can act as a pro-oxidant at
physiologically relevant concentrations **;** some studies have found that it,
like estrogen, increases the activity of the pro-oxidative free radical nitric
oxide (which acts like melatonin on pigment cells, causing them to lighten).
The promoters of estrogen are also making claims that estrogen is a protective
antioxidant, though that isnt true of physiological concentrations of
estrogen, which can catalyze intense oxidations. The market culture seems to
guide most research in these substances.

Almost any kind of stress increases the formation of melatonin.

In some animals, melatonin has been shown to be responsible for whitening of
the hair during the winter. In some species it acts directly on the pigment
cells, but in other species it seems to inhibit the action of the melanocyte
stimulating hormone.

In snowy climates, its ecologically rational for animals to turn white in
the winter, for camouflage. But tadpoles also turn white in the dark, or under
the influence of melatonin, and the biological meaning of that isnt so clear.
Its possible that being white would reduce their loss of heat through
radiation, but I think it is more likely that it relates to an increased
ability of weak radiation to penetrate their tissues, rather than being
stopped near the surface by the melanin in the skin. The absence of melanin
makes them more sensitive to light. Bright light suppresses their melatonin,
and makes them turn dark brown or black, and this protects them from bright
sunlight.

In the retina, melatonin increases the sensitivity of the cells to dim light.
It, along with prolactin, another nocturnal hormone, helps to produce dark
adaptation of the eyes.

Melatonin increases the concentration of free fatty acids during the night
(John, et al., 1983; John and George, 1976)), so its interesting that one of
the long-chain highly unsaturated fatty acids, DHA (docosahexaenoic acid),
also increases the light sensitivity of the retina.

Melatonin lowers body temperature, causes vasoconstriction in the brain,
heart, and other organs, and slows reactions. An antagonist to melatonin acts
as an antidepressant, reducing behavioral despair resulting from stress.
(Dubocovich, et al., 1990.) So, in the behavioral sense, melatonin reduces
sensitivity, yet it increases the eyes sensitivity to light, causing them to
be injured by light that would otherwise be harmless.

Since a hibernating animal under the influence of melatonin can become very
cold, the light-sensitizing function of melatonin is probably related to the
biological need to be roused out of the torpor occasionally. (Hibernators
apparently have to warm up occasionally to sleep in the ordinary manner.)
Melatonin is said to intensify dreaming, which is part of the process of
arousal from sleep.

All of the stress-related hormones increase during the night. One of the ways
these hormones of darkness act is to increase the sensitivity to light, in a
process that is an important adaptation for organisms in dim light. In the
night, our ability to see (and respond to) dim light is increased. But dark-
adapted eyes are very sensitive to injury by bright light. Light that
ordinarily wouldnt harm the eyes, will do serious damage when the eyes are
dark adapted.

In thinking about the effects of stress and oxygen deprivation, I read the
studies demonstrating that the formation of the oxygen-wasting age pigment,
lipofuscin, is increased by estrogen, by oxygen deprivation (in carp living
below the ice, or even in fetuses), by metals such as iron, by x-rays, and by
highly unsaturated fats.

Free fatty acids that are mobilized from storage tissues in the night and in
the winter also tend to increase with aging, as the ability to tolerate stress
decreases. Poor circulation and lipofuscin tend to be associated, in a vicious
cycle. This means that the retina becomes easier to injure by light in old
age, for some of the same reasons that the infants retina is susceptible.

The fetus accumulates a very large amount of iron, and it absorbs melatonin
from the maternal circulation. Prolactin is sometimes elevated in the newborn.
Premature babies are often given extra oxygen, which tends to cause
vasoconstriction by displacing carbon dioxide. Melatonins ability to cause
vasoconstriction means that stress makes supplemental oxygen more toxic.
Synthetic glucocorticoids are often given to premature babies, adding to the
risk of retinal damage.

When the mother has been given iron supplements during pregnancy, along with
unsaturated oils in the diet, the baby is likely to be born with a vitamin E
deficiency and suppressed thyroid function, increasing the probability that it
will be jaundiced, leading to treatment of the jaundice with exposure to very
bright light.

Although Yandell Henderson had already, in 1928, explained the need for carbon
dioxide to be used with oxygen for resuscitating infants or adults, medical
researchers and hospital workers could never accept the idea, probably because
of a fundamental misunderstanding of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation.
Animal experiments show that supplemental oxygen, without carbon dioxide,
causes vasoconstriction, reducing the tissues supply of glucose as well as
oxygen. In combination with too much light, especially blue light, it damages
the retina. At hyperbaric pressure, oxygen causes seizures, as well as damage
to the lungs and other tissues.

The contribution of bright light to retinal damage in babies has been denied
in several recent publications, and these articles undoubtedly provide useful
material for defense lawyers to use when hospitals are sued for causing
blindness. One publication based on experiments with kittens concludes that
bright light does not harm the newborns retina, but the comparison is between
continuous light and intermittent light, rather than between bright light and
dim light. Twelve hours of total darkness, rather than sparing the eye by
reducing its exposure to light, would sensitize the eye. The only reason such
appalling things can be published is that their conclusions protect the
hospitals.

A few good studies of the effect of bright light on the retina, and the fact
that dark-skinned people with more protective pigment in their eyes have a
lower incidence of retinopathy of prematurity, make it clear that the ordinary
laws of physics and chemistry actually do apply to the infant eye.

Light and stress, especially with excess iron, damage the retina when the
cells contain too much PUFA, since these fats react with light and free
radicals. The nocturnal/stress hormones, especially prolactin and melatonin,
make the retina more sensitive to light, and more easily damaged. (It's too
much darkness that sets up the problem, since the eyes will adapt to excess
light, but darkness increases their sensitivity.)

The use of lasers to operate on eyes produces intense inflammation of the eye,
but even at low dose the diffusing light causes retinal/macular damage.

Cytochrome oxidase is one of the enzymes damaged by stress and by blue light,
and activated or restored by red light, thyroid, and progesterone. It's a
copper enzyme, so it's likely to be damaged by excess iron. It is most active
when it is associated with a mitochondrial lipid, cardiolipin, that contains
saturated palmitic acid **;** the substitution of polyunsaturated fats lowers
its activity. Mitochonrial function in general is poisoned by the unsaturated
fats, especially arachidonic acid and DHA.

Creating a deficiency of DHA, even when an oil of known toxicity is used to
replace the omega -3 oils, prevents retinal damage from light. Despite
evidence of this sort, Mead Johnson is going ahead with the marketing of its
baby formula containing added DHA which is industrially extracted from algae.
(Although the researchers who claim that DHA is beneficial havent answered my
letters, a representative of the company that manufactures it did answer my
question about the actual composition of the oil, and acknowledged that they
dont have any idea what the minor ingredients might be.)

When animals are made deficient in all the exogenous polyunsaturated fatty
acids, linoleic and arachidonic acid as well as linolenic and DHA, they become
remarkably resistant to all sorts of stress and toxins.

The polyunsaturated fats make the lungs more sensitive to excess oxygen or
hyperventilation, they make the eyes more sensitive to light, and they make
the brain more sensitive to fatigue.

The use of synthetic glucocorticoid hormone is standard in treating very
premature babies, although it is known to contribute to eye damage. This is
because it is considered necessary to improve the lung function of premature
babies with respiratory distress. But there is no clear evidence that it is
beneficial for lung function in the long run, and very clear evidence that it
damages the brain and other organs. There is widespread agreement regarding
the use of the glucocorticoids **_prenatally_** to accelerate lung development
in women who seem likely to deliver prematurely. Natural cortisol is a factor
that promotes lung development prenatally. But cortisol is also a signal
produced by a stressed fetus, that triggers the birth process. Cortisol, or
the synthetic glucocorticoid, inhibits progesterone production, and stimulates
estrogen production, activating uterine contractions and other processes that
terminate the pregnancy.

Apparently, it doesnt occur to many people that administering the
glucocorticoid triggers premature birth, creating the problem they are
intending to treat.

Recognizing causal connections between premature birth and respiratory
distress and retinopathy of prematurity, it would be obvious that the greatest
effort should be made to prevent the problems by improving the health of
pregnant women. Hospitals, however, are invested in high technology systems
for treating these problems, and even though their results are dismal, they
cant make money by getting pregnant women to eat enough protein to prevent
preeclampsia, which is a major cause of premature birth, or by treating the
problems with salt, magnesium, progesterone, thyroid, and aspirin when the
women havent had a good diet.

Historically, preeclampsia has been blamed on the mothers or fetuss bad
genes, and that cultural bias was the setting in which these high technology
prenatal and neonatal systems developed. High technology neonatology derives
from the same ideology that motivated Josef Mengeles genetic research in
Auschwitz. The idea of genetic determination is still motivating resistance to
reasonable preventive approaches.

Thyroid, i.e., T3, is very effective in accelerating lung development in the
fetus, and it doesnt have any of the harmful effects of the synthetic
glucocorticoids. It normalizes the hormones, increasing progesterone and
decreasing estrogen, which are needed for full-term gestation, the opposite of
the glucocorticoids effects. While the cortisol-like drugs damage the brain
and other organs, thyroid and progesterone protect them.

**Old organisms, like newborns, are easily injured by all sorts of
inappropriate excitation. As in premature babies, the aged eyes, lungs, and
brain are especially sensitive to damage by stress. _But all organs are
subject to the same kinds of damage._** Medical treatments for respiratory
distress and macular degeneration in old people are often the same as those
used so inappropriately for babies. ** _The good health practices that can
prevent the inflammatory and degenerative diseases can often make it possible
for damaged tissues to recover, even in old age._**

The pituitary hormones, especially prolactin and TSH, are pro-inflammatory,
and darkness increases TSH along with prolactin, so to compensate for a light
deficiency, the pituitary should be well-suppressed by adequate thyroid.
Armour thyroid or Thyrolar or Cynoplus, Cytomel, would probably be helpful.
(Eye-drops containing T3 might be a way to restore metabolic activity more
quickly.) Limiting water intake (or using salt generously) helps to inhibit
prolactin secretion. The saturated fats protect against the body's stored
PUFA, and keeping the blood sugar up keeps the stored fats from being
mobilized. Aspirin (or indomethacin) is generally protective to the retina,
analogously to its protection against sunburn. Adequate vitamin E is extremely
important. There are several prescription drugs that protect against serotonin
excess, but thyroid and gelatin (or glycine, as in magnesium glycinate) are
protective against the serotonin and melatonin toxicities. Copper and
magnesium deficiencies predispose to retinal damage. Red light is protective,
blue light (or u.v.) is harmful, so wearing orange lenses would be helpful.
Progesterone and pregnenolone, by reducing the stress reactions, should be
helpful--in the eye diseases of infancy and old age, as they are in the
respiratory distress syndromes.  

**REFERENCES**

Eksp Klin Farmakol 1999 Mar-Apr; 62(2):58-60. **[Melatonin lowers the
threshold of light sensitivity of the human retina]** ; Arushanian EB,
Ovanesov KB. Department of Pharmacology, Stavropol State Medical Academy,
Russia. After chronic use of melatonin (3 mg before night-time for 14 days)
campimetry showed a significant decrease of the threshold of brilliance
sensitiveness of the retina in the absence of authentic changes of the
sensorimotor response latency in individuals of the older age group. A
connection between the eye light sensitivity and the direct effect of the
hormone on the photoreceptors is suggested.

Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001;4:CD001077. **Restricted versus liberal oxygen
exposure for preventing morbidity and mortality in preterm or low birth weight
infants** (Cochrane Review). Askie LM, Henderson-Smart DJ.

Prog Clin Biol Res 1989;312:95-112. **The metabolism of omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids in the eye: the possible role of docosahexaenoic
acid and docosanoids in retinal physiology and ocular pathology.** Bazan NG.

Biull Eksp Biol Med 1976 Oct;82(10):1181-3. **[Role of the biological activity
of serotonin in the production of the "shock lung" syndrome.] ;** Bazarevich
GI, Deviataev AM, Likhtenshtein AO, Natsvlishvili BP, Sadeko MK.

Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1993 Sep;34(10):2878-80. **An elevated hematogenous
photosensitizer in the preterm neonate.** Bynoe LA, Gottsch JD, Sadda SR,
Panton RW, Haller EM, Gleason CA.

Eur J Endocrinol 1995 Dec;133(6):691-5. **Melatonin enhances cortisol levels
in aged but not young women.** Cagnacci A, Soldani R, Yen SS

Am J Psychiatry 1976 Oct;133(10):1181-6. **Negative effects of melatonin on
depression.** Carman JS, Post RM, Buswell R, Goodwin FK. In order to test the
efficacy of the pineal neurohumor melatonin on depression, the hormone was
administered in varying doses to six moderately to severely depressed patients
and two patients with Huntington's chorea in double-blind crossover study.
**Melatonin exacerbated symptoms of dysphoria in these patients, as well as
causing a loss of sleep and weight and a drop in oral temperature. Melatonin
increased cerebrospinal fluid 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid and calcium** in
three of four patients studied. The authors discuss the implications of this
finding.

Neuroendocrinol Lett 2001 Dec;22(6):432-4. **Melatonin shortens the survival
rate of Ehrlich ascites-inoculated mice.** Catrina SB, Curca E, Catrina AI,
Radu C, Coculescu M. Dept. Endocrinology II, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. [sergiu-
bogdan.catrina@molmed.ki.se](mailto:sergiu-bogdan.catrina@molmed.ki.se) The
average survival rate of the animals treated with melatonin was shorter
(14.8+/-2.23 days) compared to control animals (21.9+/-2.21 days)(p=0.01).
CONCLUSION: In our model, melatonin had a deleterious effect on the survival
rate raising the question whether it is correct to assume that the hormone
shows lack of adverse reactions.

J Neurochem 1988 Apr;50(4):1185-93. **Induction of intracellular superoxide
radical formation by arachidonic acid and by polyunsaturated fatty acids in
primary astrocytic cultures.** Chan PH, Chen SF, Yu AC.

Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1993 Jul;231(7):416-23. **Inhibition of
cytochrome oxidase and blue-light damage in rat retina.** Chen E. St. Erik's
Eye Hospital, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. **The activity of
cytochrome oxidase, outer nuclear layer thickness, and edema were
quantitatively evaluated in the blue-light exposed rat retina.** Dark-adapted
or cyclic-light reared rats were exposed to blue light with a retinal dose of
380 kJ/m2. Immediately, 1, 2, and 3 day(s) after exposure, the retinas of six
rats from each adaptation group were examined. There was no difference between
the dark-adapted and cyclic-light reared rats. Immediately after light
exposure, cytochrome oxidase activity decreased. The activity in the inner
segments remained low at day 1, while severe edema was observed in the inner
and outer segments. The outer nuclear layer thickness decreased 1-3 days after
exposure. The blue-light exposure inhibited cytochrome oxidase activity and
caused retinal injury. Similarity of the injury process in the dark-adapted
and cyclic-light reared retinas suggests that rhodopsin was not involved. The
inhibition of cytochrome oxidase could be a cause of retinal damage.

Acta Ophthalmol Suppl 1993;(208):1-50. **Inhibition of enzymes by short-wave
optical radiation and its effect on the retina.** Chen E. Eye Laboratory, St.
Erik's Eye Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Exposure to short-wave optical
radiation is a potential hazard for vision. In the present study, blue-light
damage is studied in rat retina. **Blue light inhibited cytochrome**
**oxidase** at a retinal dose of about 110 kJ/m2. This inhibition was
reversible, and is probably related to the light regulation of retinal
metabolism. At a retinal dose of about 380 kJ/m2, the inhibition of cytochrome
oxidase was followed consecutively by a probable redistribution of chlorine
and potassium in the inner and outer segments, damage to the mitochondria in
the inner segments, edema in the inner and outer segments, and progressive
degeneration of photoreceptor cells. Dark adaptation did not increase the
blue-light retinal injury. **These findings support the hypothesis that
inhibition of cytochrome oxidase is one of the causes of blue-light retinal
damage.** 

Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1997 May;25 Suppl 1:S73-5. **Retinal control of scleral
precursor synthesis.** Devadas M, Morgan

Eur J Pharmacol 1990 Jul 3;182(2):313-25. **Antidepressant-like activity of
the melatonin receptor antagonist, luzindole (N-0774), in the mouse behavioral
despair test.** Dubocovich ML, Mogilnicka E, Areso PM.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1988 Sep;246(3):902-10. **Luzindole (N-0774): a novel
melatonin** **receptor antagonist.** Dubocovich ML.

Exp Eye Res 1985 Oct;41(4):497-507. **The diurnal susceptibility of rat
retinal photoreceptors to light-induced damage.** Duncan TE, O'Steen WK.
Exposure of albino rats to high intensity light results in rapid, graded loss
of photoreceptors. The hormonal status and age of an animal at the time of
exposure affect the severity of light-induced retinal damage. The adrenal axis
and pituitary hormones (prolactin) have been demonstrated previously to affect
the degree of cell death in the retina. Because circadian rhythms for adrenal
and pituitary secretion have been demonstrated in the rat, a series of
experiments was undertaken to determine if a diurnal pattern of retinal
susceptibility to light damage exists which might be related to endogenous
endocrine rhythms. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to 4 hr of high
intensity fluorescent light for 8 consecutive days during different phases of
the 14:10 hr light: dark animal room light cycle. Morphometric analysis
performed at the light microscopic level 2 weeks after exposure demonstrated a
differential susceptibility to light-induced cell death depending upon the
period during the light-dark cycle when animals received their daily light
exposure. Neuronal cell death was confined to the outer nuclear layer as
previously described. **The retinas of animals exposed during the middle of
the dark period or during the first 5 hr of the light period were
significantly more damaged than the retinas of animals exposed during the last
9 hr of the light period.** Control groups for the relative amounts of dark-
adaptation between groups suggested that the diurnal susceptibility to light
damage was not solely dependent upon the degree of dark adaptation. These
results demonstrate a diurnal susceptibility of photoreceptors to light-
induced cell death.

Nature 1983 Dec 22-1984 Jan 4;306(5945):782-4. **Melatonin is a potent
modulator of dopamine release in the retina.** Dubocovich ML.

Semin Perinatol 2000 Aug;24(4):291-8. **Environmental light and the preterm
infant.** Fielder AR, Moseley MJ. The lighting environment of the preterm baby
is quite unlike that experienced at any other time of life. Physical and
physiological factors control how much light reaches the retina of the preterm
baby. With respect to the former, although many neonatal intensive care units
are brightly and continuously lit, there is a trend to employ lower levels of
illumination and to introduce cycling regimens. Physiological determinants of
the retinal light dose include: eyelid opening and transmission, pupil
diameter and the transmission characteristics of the ocular media. Early
exposure to light does not significantly hasten or retard normal visual
development, and it is not a factor in the development of retinopathy of
prematurity. However, ambient neonatal intensive care unit illumination may be
implicated in some of the more subtle visual pathway sequelae that cannot be
attributed to other major complications of preterm birth including altered
visual functions and arrested eye growth.

Pediatrics 1992 Apr;89(4 Pt 1):648-53. **Light and retinopathy of prematurity:
does retinal location offer a clue?** Fielder AR, Robinson J, Shaw DE, Ng YK,
Moseley MJ. Nursery illumination has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), although the results of recent studies are
conflicting. The data base for this article is a prospective ROP study on 607
infants of birth weight less than or equal to 1700 g including 35 larger
siblings from multiple births when 1 infant fulfilled the birth weight
criteria. Retinopathy commences preferentially in the nasal retina of the most
immature neonate and is less likely to develop, or its onset is delayed, in
the superior and inferior **regions. These findings cannot be fully accounted
for by regional vascular and neuroanatomical variations. Radiometric and
physiological evidence suggests that the very immature neonate, most at risk
of developing severe ROP, receives the greatest retinal irradiance.
Furthermore, ROP commences in the areas of the retina receiving the highest
light dose, and its onset is either retarded or inhibited in the darker
retinal regions. Further studies are required to** determine whether early
exposure to light is a factor in the development of ROP. If a causal
relationship is proven, here at least is one modality that can easily and
immediately be controlled.

N Engl J Med 1985 Aug 15;313(7):401-4. **Effect of bright light in the
hospital nursery on the incidence of retinopathy of prematurity.** Glass P,
Avery GB, Subramanian KN, Keys MP, Sostek AM, Friendly DS. The preterm infant
is subjected to prolonged exposure to ambient nursery illumination at levels
that have been found to produce retinal damage in animals. We prospectively
investigated the effect of exposure to light in two intensive care nurseries
by comparing the incidence of retinopathy of prematurity among 74 infants from
the standard bright nursery environment (median light level, 60 foot-candles
[ftc]) with the incidence among 154 infants of similar birth weight for whom
the light levels were reduced (median, 25 ftc). **There was a higher incidence
of retinopathy of prematurity in the group of infants who had been exposed to
the brighter nursery lights,** particularly in those with birth weights below
1000 g (86 percent vs. 54 per cent, P less than 0.01 by chi-square test). We
conclude that the high level of ambient illumination commonly found in the
hospital nursery may be one factor contributing to retinopathy of prematurity
and that safety standards with regard to current lighting practices should be
reassessed.

Doc Ophthalmol 1990 Mar;74(3):195-203. **Light and the developing retina.**
Glass P. George Washington University School of Medicine & Health Sciences,
Washington, DC. **Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) has increased in the
United States in the past decade.** 

Pediatr Res 1987 Oct;22(4):414-6. Calcemic responses to photic and
pharmacologic manipulation of serum melatonin. Hakanson DO, Penny R, Bergstrom
WH.

Pediatr Res 1990 Jun;27(6):571-3. **Pineal and adrenal effects on calcium
homeostasis in the rat.** Hakanson DO, Bergstrom WH.

Science 1981 Nov 13;214(4522):807-9. **Phototherapy-induced hypocalcemia in
newborn rats: prevention by melatonin.** Hakanson DO, Bergstrom WH.

Doc Ophthalmol 1992;79(2):141-50. **Diurnal variations in the
electroretinographic c-wave and retinal melatonin content in rats with
inherited retinal dystrophy.** Hawlina M, Jenkins HG, Ikeda H.

**J.A.M.A. 90:353 (Feb. 25) 1928. The Prevention and Treatment of Asphyxia in
the New-Born, Henderson, Yandell.**

Neuroendocrinology 2001 Feb;73(2):111-22. **Estrogen modulates alpha(1)/beta-
adrenoceptor- induced signaling and melatonin production in female rat
pinealocytes.** Hernandez-Diaz FJ, Sanchez JJ, Abreu P, Lopez-Coviella I,
Tabares L, Prieto L, Alonso R.

J Neurosci Res 1989 Oct;24(2):247-50. **Brain mitochondrial swelling induced
by arachidonic acid and other long chain free fatty acids.** Hillered L, Chan
PH.

J Neurosci Res 1988;19(1):94-100. **Effects of arachidonic acid on respiratory
activities in isolated brain mitochondria.** Hillered L, Chan PH.

J Neurosci Res 1988 Aug;20(4):451-6. **Role of arachidonic acid and other free
fatty acids in mitochondrial dysfunction in brain ischemia.** Hillered L, Chan
PH.

J Neurosci Res 1989 Oct;24(2):247-50. **Brain mitochondrial swelling induced
by arachidonic acid and other long chain free fatty acids.** Hillered L, Chan
PH.

J Clin Epidemiol 1992 Nov;45(11):1265-87. **Oxygen as a cause of blindness in
premature infants: "autopsy" of a decade of errors in clinical epidemiologic
research.** Jacobson RM, Feinstein AR. Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510. Several intellectual
"autopsies" have recently reviewed errors in clinical epidemiologic studies of
causation, such as the original claim that amyl nitrite "poppers" caused AIDS.
The current autopsy was done to determine why it took **more than a decade--
1942 to 1954--to end an iatrogenic epidemic in which high-dose oxygen therapy
led to retrolental fibroplasia (RLF) in premature infants, blinding about
10,000 of them.** The autopsy revealed a museum of diverse intellectual
pathology.

Curr Eye Res 2001 Jul;23(1):11-9. **Rod outer segments mediate mitochondrial
DNA damage and apoptosis in human retinal pigment epithelium.** Jin GF, Hurst
JS, Godley BF.

Endocrinol Exp 1976 Jun;10(2):131-7. **Diurnal variation in the effect of
melatonin on plasma and muscle free fatty acid levels in the pigeon.** John
TM, George JC. Pigeons maintained on standard diet and held under 12 h daily
photo-period in a controlled environmental room, were given intravenous
injections of melatonin. A low dose (1.25 mg/kg body weight) of melatonin when
given in the middle of the **scotophase, produced a significant increase in
plasma FFA when estimated at 20 min and 90 min post-injection, whereas no
significant change was seen with injections given in the middle of the
photophase. No significant change in muscle FFA level was obtained either
during the photophase or the scotophase** when estimated at 90 min
postinjection. With a higher dose (5 mg/kg body weight) of melatonin given in
the scotophase, on the other hand, a significant increase **in both plasma as
well as muscle FFA levels was obtained at 90 min** post-injection but there
was no effect on plasma FFA at 20 min or 90 min post-injection in the
photophase and at 20 min in the scotophase. It is concluded that melatonin has
a lipid mobilizing action in the pigeon when administered during the
scotophase.

Arch Int Physiol Biochim 1983 Jul;91(2):115-20. **Diurnal impact of locomotory
activity and melatonin and N-acetylserotonin treatment on blood metabolite
levels in the rainbow trout.** John TM, Beamish FW, George JC. In rainbow
trout forced to swim continuously at sustained speeds for six weeks, selected
doses of melatonin or N-acetylserotonin (1.25 and 5.0 mg/kg body weight)
injections caused no change in haematocrit. Melatonin did not produce any
significant change in plasma glucose level either in the photophase or in the
scotophase. However, diurnal variations were observed in the effect of
melatonin on plasma free fatty acids (FFA). Melatonin was ineffective in
causing **any change in plasma FFA level during photophase but during
scotophase, the higher dose (5.0 mg/kg) produced an increase in FFA while the
lower dose (1.25 mg/kg) had no effect, N-acetylserotonin administration
produced diurnal** variation in its effect on both plasma glucose and FFA. The
higher dose of N-acetylserotonin brought about a drop in plasma glucose level
during photophase, but both doses were ineffective during scotophase.
N-acetylserotonin produced no change in FFA during photophase, but during
scotophase tended to lower FFA level. It is suggested that exercise shortens
the time required to cause a hypoglycemic effect of N-acetylserotonin during
photophase, blocks FFA release-inhibiting action of melatonin observed in
photophase, and minimizes the time required for the FFA mobilizing action of
melatonin in scotophase.

J Neural Transm 1977;40(2):87-97. **The adrenal medulla may mediate the
increase in pineal melatonin synthesis induced by stress, but not that caused
by exposure to darkness.** Lynch HJ, Ho M, Wurtman RJ.

Bull Acad Natl Med 2000;184(2):415-28; discussion 428-30. **[Pulmonary
toxicity of oxygen]** [Article in French] Mantz JM, Stoeckel ME.

Br J Pharmacol 1977 Dec;61(4):607-14. **The action of melatonin on single
amphibian pigment cells in tissue culture.** Messenger EA, Warner AE.

Oftalmol Zh 1989;(8):469-73. **[The early diagnosis, evaluation of treatment
results and modelling of certain aspects of the pathogenesis of retinal
dystrophy]** ; Mironova EM, Pavlova ON, Ronkina TI. The paper analyses results
after a study of the functional state of pigmented epithelium and the retina
in patients with a dry form of senile macular dystrophy as well as of
experimental simulation of retinal dystrophy with the help of melatonin and
its treatment by taurine. **Melatonin in 10(-3) M concentration leads to
development of dystrophic changes** in pigmented epithelium and interacting
with it structures, this being testified by remarkable lowering of EOG
parameters and electron microscopic findings. Taurine in 10(-3) **M
concentration blocks the action of exogenic melatonin as well as has a
pronounced positive action on metabolism of dystrophic changes in the
pigmented epithelium and photoreceptors. Examination of patients with
different stages of a dry form of senile** macular dystrophy revealed
statistically significant reduction of KA cEOG at the initial stage of the
disease in the presence of normal ERG parameters. In 18% of patients,
supernormal values of KA were recorded, that are likely to reflect the
presence of "predystrophic hyperactivity" of the pigmented epithelium cells.
In progression of the process, the further reduction of electrophysiologic
values was recorded. The data obtained speaks about the important role of
pigmented epithelium pathology in the pathogenesis of senile macular dystrophy
and about high information value of the cEOG method for detection of early
stages of the disease. It is believed that disturbances in melatonin
metabolism can be one of causes leading to development of retinal dystrophy.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1977 Oct;45(4):768-74. **The effects of oral melatonin
on skin color and on the release of pituitary hormones.** Nordlund JJ, Lerner
AB. We studied the effects of prolonged ingestion of melatonin, 1 g per day,
on skin color and the serum levels of pituitary hormones in 5 human subjects
with hyperpigmented skin. Melatonin lightened hyperpigmented skin of one
patient with untreated adrenogenital syndrome, but had no effect on three
patients' skin with idiopathic hyperpigmentation and one patient with treated
Addison's disease.

Invest Ophthalmol 1976 Oct;15(10):869-72. **Hormonal influences on
photoreceptor damage: the pituitary gland and ovaries.** Olafson RP, O'Steen
WK. To determine whether the absence of pituitary or ovarian hormones would
influence retinal degeneration, female albino rats were either
hypophysectomized (HYPEX) or ovariectomized (OVEX) before pubery. Later, they
were exposed to continuous light for periods up to 45 days. Retinas evaluated
by light microscopic measurements showed damage to the outer nuclear layer
(ONL) and photoreceptor layer in both the operated and intact, control rats.
However, the degree of damage observed in retinas of HYPEX and OVEX rats was
significantly less than that observed in retinas of intact rats exposed to the
same lighting conditions. Therefore, hypophysectomy and ovariectomy, which
influence the normal development of sexual maturation when performed on
immature rats, significantly reduce photoreceptor damage in adult rats exposed
to continuous light.

Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1996 Oct;37(11):2243-57. **Retinal light damage in
rats with altered levels of rod outer segment docosahexaenoate. Organisciak
DT, Darrow RM, Jiang YL, Blanks JC.** PURPOSE: To compare retinal light damage
in rats with either normal or reduced levels of rod outer segment (ROS)
docosahexaenoic acid. METHODS: Weanling male albino rats were maintained in a
weak cyclic light environment and fed either a nonpurified control diet or a
purified diet deficient in the linolenic acid precursor of docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA). Half the rats on the deficient diet were given linseed oil,
containing more than 50 mol% linolenic acid, once a week to maintain ROS DHA
at near normal levels. Diets and linseed oil supplementation were continued
for 7 to 12 weeks. To replenish DHA in their ROS, some 10-week-old rats on the
deficient diet were given linseed oil three times a week for up to 3
additional weeks. Groups of animals were killed at various times for ROS fatty
acid determinations or were exposed to intense green light using intermittent
or hyperthermic light treatments. The extent of retinal light damage was
determined biochemically by rhodopsin or photoreceptor cell DNA measurements 2
weeks after exposure and morphologically by light and electron microscopy at
various times after light treatment. RESULTS: **Rats maintained for 7 to 12
weeks on the linolenic acid-deficient diet had significantly lower levels of
DHA** and significantly higher levels of n-6 docosapentaenoic acid (22:5n-6)
in their ROS than deficient-diet animals supplemented once a week with linseed
oil or those fed the nonpurified control diet. As determined by rhodopsin
levels and photoreceptor cell DNA measurements, deficient diet rats
**exhibited protection against retinal damage from either intermittent or
hyperthermic light exposure. However, the unsaturated fatty acid content of
ROS** from all three dietary groups was the same and greater than 60 mol%. In
10 week-old deficient-diet rats given linseed oil three times a week, ROS DHA
was unchanged for the first 10 days, whereas 22:5n-6 levels declined by 50%.
After 3 weeks of treatment with linseed oil, ROS DHA and 22:5n-6 were nearly
the same as in rats supplemented with linseed oil from weaning. The time
course of susceptibility to retinal light damage, however, was different.
Hyperthermic light damage in rats given linseed oil for only 2 days was the
same as for rats always fed the deficient diet. Six days after the start of
linseed oil treatment, retinal light damage was the same as in rats given the
linseed oil supplement from weaning. Morphologic alterations in ROS of linseed
oil-supplemented rats immediately after intermittent light exposure were more
extensive than in either the deficient-diet animals or those fed the control
diet. The deficient-diet rats also exhibited better preservation of
photoreceptor cell nuclei and structure 2 weeks after exposure. CONCLUSIONS:
Rats fed a diet deficient in the linolenic acid precursor of DHA are protected
against experimental retinal light damage. The relationship between retinal
light damage and ROS lipids does not depend on the total unsaturated fatty
acid content of ROS; the damage appears to be related to the relative levels
of DHA and 22:5n-6.

Exp Neurol 1970 May;27(2):194-205. **Retinal and optic nerve serotonin and
retinal degeneration as influenced by photoperiod.** O'Steen WK.

Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1982 Jan;22(1):1-7. **Antagonistic effects of
adrenalectomy and ether/surgical stress on light-induced photoreceptor
damage.** O'Steen WK, Donnelly JE. Light-induced damage to retinal
photoreceptors in influenced by the endocrine status of the animal during the
period of exposure. Experimental manipulation of the pituitary gland and of
prolactin levels has been shown to affect retinal damage in rats exposed to
visible light. When rats are experimentally stressed, prolactin secretion from
the pituitary gland occurs as does secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), which stimulates the release of adrenal cortical hormones. Since
prolactin appears to influence retinal damage and since stressed animals have
increased serum levels of prolactin, a comparison of photoreceptor damage in
animals in which the adrenal glands were removed or which had been
experimentally stressed was undertaken in this study. Adrenalectomized rats
had thicker outer nuclear layer (ONL) measurements than those found in sham-
operated animals. Stressed rats had severely damaged retinas with cystic
degeneration and significantly reduced ONL thickness measurements as compared
to retinas of unstressed and adrenalectomized rats. **Therefore hormones of
the pituitary-adrenal system appear to be involved in the damage to the retina
by light, and this response may be related to an interaction or synergism
between the adrenal gland, stress, and prolactin secretion.**

Brain Res 1990 Nov 26;534(1-2):99-105. **Water deprivation protects
photoreceptors against light damage.** O'Steen WK, Bare DJ, Tytell M, Morris
M, Gower DJ. Photoreceptor cell death after light-damage and during aging in
rats is associated with the hormonal status of the animal, as well as other
environmental and intrinsic factors. Restricted caloric intake extends the
life of rodents and is usually accompanied by a reduction in water
consumption. In this study, male and female rats were placed on restricted
water intake for either 3 or 7 days to induce dehydration. Photoreceptor
cells of 7-day, dehydrated male and female rats survived light-damage
significantly better than those allowed water ad libitum; however, after 3
days of water restriction, only the male rats demonstrated protection from
photodamage. AVP increased by 350% during the 7-day period of dehydration.
Protection of photoreceptors from light-damage in this study may be correlated
with osmotically stimulated changes in the retinas of dehydrated animals.

Brain Res 1985 Oct 7;344(2):231-9. **Neuronal damage in the rat retina after
chronic stress.** O'Steen WK, Brodish A. Long-term exposure to escapable foot
shock has been used to determine if chronic stress influences neuronal cell
death in the retina of albino and pigmented rats. Histopathologic and
morphometric approaches analyzed changes in photoreceptors and neurons of the
bipolar and ganglion cell layers of the retina. Albino Fischer rats when
exposed to chronic stress for 4-8 h daily for 1 week to 6 months, developed
severe retinal damage, as compared to unstressed control retinas, with
reduction in photoreceptor and bipolar neurons, particularly in the superior
central retina. The damage was observed in male and female rats, but males
appeared to be more susceptible to the influence of stress than female
animals. Ganglion cells were unaffected. Photoreceptor destruction did not
occur in Long-Evans pigmented rats under identical experimental conditions.
The results suggest that: **input of the sensory stimulus, light, to the
retina of stressed rats augmented neuronal damage and might be required for
its initiation;** and hormones and/or neurotransmitters associated with long-
term chronic stress might be related to increased neuronal cell death in the
mammalian retina.

Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1977 Oct;16(10):940-6. **Effects of hypophysectomy,
pituitary gland homogenates and transplants, and prolactin on photoreceptor
destruction.** O'Steen WK, Kraeer SL. Prepubertal removal of the pituitary
gland, which in young animals influences sexual maturation, reduces
significantly the amount of retinal photoreceptor destruction when the rats
are exposed to continuous illumination in adulthood. When crude pituitary
gland homogenate is administered to adult rats hypophysectomized prior to
puberty, photoreceptor destruction is more severe. Transplantation of whole
pituitary glands to the kidney capsule of hypophysectomized rats also reduces
the effect of pituitary gland removal and results in more extensive damage to
receptor cells than found in hypophysectomized, adult animals.
**Hypophysectomized rats treated with prolactin had more severe retinal damage
than untreated, hypophysectomized rats.** Results of these studies indicate
the hormones of the pituitary gland have a regulatory influence on the
severity of light-induced, retinal photoreceptor damage in the rat.

Life Sci 1985 Nov 4;37(18):1743-6. **Stress-induced synthesis of melatonin:
possible involvement of the endogenous monoamine oxidase inhibitor
(tribulin).** Oxenkrug GF, McIntyre IM.

Mech Ageing Dev 2000 Jan 10;112(3):169-83. **Double bond content of
phospholipids and lipid peroxidation negatively correlate with maximum
longevity in the heart of mammals.** Pamplona R, Portero-Otin M, Ruiz C,
Gredilla R, Herrero A, Barja G.

Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2001 Feb;64(2):75-80. **Comparative
studies on lipid peroxidation of microsomes and mitochondria obtained from
different rat tissues: effect of retinyl palmitate.** Piergiacomi VA, Palacios
A, Catala A.

Curr Eye Res 1992 Oct;11(10):939-53. **Oxygen-induced retinopathy in the rat:
hemorrhages and dysplasias may lead to retinal detachment.** Penn JS, Tolman
BL, Lowery LA, Koutz CA.

Vision Res 1995 May;35(9):1247-64. **Studies on the role of the retinal
dopamine/melatonin system in experimental refractive errors in chickens.**
Schaeffel F, Bartmann M, Hagel G, Zrenner E.

Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 1997;105(2): 109-12. **Melatonin** **and
serotonin regulate the release of insulin-like growth factor-I, oxytocin and
progesterone by cultured human granulosa cells.** Schaeffer HJ, Sirotkin AV.

Zh Evol Biokhim Fiziol 1989 Jan-Feb;25(1):52-9. **[Seasonal characteristics of
the functioning of the hypophysis-gonad system in the suslik** Citellus
parryi] Shvareva NV, Nevretdinova ZG. In females, FSH was found in the blood
in October, being absent from November to **January; beginning from February,
it may be found both in sleeping and active** animals. **Estradiol secretion
was noted in hibernating females, whereas progesterone was found in the blood
only in May.**

J Pineal Res 1985;2(1):39-49. **Melatonin and N-acetylserotonin stress
responses: effects of type of stimulation and housing conditions.** Seggie J,
Campbell L, Brown GM, Grota LJ.

Acta Ophthalmol Scand 2001 Aug;79(4):428-30. **Presumed sertraline
maculopathy.** Sener EC, Kiratli H.

Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 1999 Apr;13(2):128-30. **Effects of premature
exposure to light: a credibility struggle.** Silverman WA.

J Pineal Res 1994 Oct;17(3):112-7. **Direct influence of melatonin on steroid,
nonapeptide hormones, and cyclic nucleotide secretion by granulosa cells
isolated from porcine ovaries.** Sirotkin AV. **It was found that melatonin
is able to inhibit progesterone and stimulate estradiol secretion.** The
present observations suggest a direct effect of melatonin on the steroid,
nonapeptide hormone, and cyclic nucleotide release from porcine ovarian
cells.

J Pineal Res 1994 Oct;17(3):112-7. **Direct influence of melatonin on steroid,
nonapeptide hormones, and cyclic nucleotide secretion by granulosa cells
isolated from porcine ovaries.** Sirotkin AV.

Prog Clin Biol Res 1989;312:229-49. **Inhibitors of the arachidonic acid
cascade in the management of ocular inflammation.** Srinivasan BD, Kulkarni
PS.

J Nutr 2000 Dec;130(12):3028-33. **Polyunsaturated (n-3) fatty acids
susceptible to peroxidation are increased in plasma and tissue lipids of rats
fed docosahexaenoic acid-containing oils.** Song JH, Fujimoto K, Miyazawa T.
**Thus, high incorporation of (n-3) fatty acids (mainly DHA) into plasma and
tissue lipids due to DHA-containing oil ingestion may undesirably affect
tissues by enhancing** susceptibility of membranes to lipid peroxidation and
by disrupting the antioxidant system.

Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1992 Feb;70(1):115-22. **Effects of steady electric
fields on human retinal pigment epithelial cell orientation and migration in
culture.** Sulik GL, Soong HK, Chang PC, Parkinson WC, Elner SG, Elner VM

Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 2001 Dec 29;145(52):2521-5. **[Administration of
glucocorticosteroids to premature infants: increasing evidence of adverse
effects]** [Article in Dutch] van Bel F. **Neonatal glucocorticosteroid
therapy is increasingly being used for the prevention of chronic lung disease
in very premature infants. In the short term this therapy is usually
successful. There is, however, increasing evidence for long-term adverse
effects. In particular there seems to be an increased chance of abnormal brain
development, which later results in locomotory dysfunction, developmental
delay and cerebral palsy.** 

Brain Res 1984 Feb 27;294(1):166-8. **Pineal methoxyindoles depress calcium
uptake by rat brain synaptosomes.** Vacas MI, Keller Sarmiento MI, Cardinali
DP.

Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994 Nov 17;738:408-18. **Serotonin binding proteins: an in
vitro model system for monoamine-related neurotoxicity.** Vauquelin G, Del Rio
MJ, Pardo CV.

J Hypertens Suppl 1985 Dec;3 Suppl 3:S107-9. **Seasonal variation in the
development of stress-induced systolic hypertension in the rat.** Weinstock M,
Blotnick S, Segal M. Seasonal variation in blood pressure in human
hypertensives prompted us to investigate whether such a phenomenon also occurs
in rats made hypertensive by environmental stress. **Systolic pressure
increased by 14-25 mmHg after 6-8 weeks of stress from October to January.
Artificial environmental light for 15 h prevented development of hypertension
by stress,** which could also be reversed by acute administration of
propranolol. Hypertensive rats had significantly greater relative heart and
adrenal weights. This phenomenon can be explained by amplification of
**sympathetic pressor activity by stress hormones, adrenaline, corticosterone
and prolactin, under the influence of melatonin.**

Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992 May;33(6):1894-902. **Melatonin increases
photoreceptor susceptibility to light-induced damage.** Wiechmann AF, O'Steen
WK. **Pinealectomy has been shown to protect photoreceptors from light-
induced damage, and melatonin treatment has been reported to increase the
degree of photoreceptor damage in albino rats.**  The animals that received
daily melatonin injections (100 micrograms) in the late afternoon (3 hr before
lights off) for 1-3 days before photodamage showed an approximate 30% greater
reduction compared with sham control animals in ONL thickness in the superior
quadrant, the area most susceptible to light damage. Melatonin injections
given after the photodamage did not affect ONL thickness. Although retinal
susceptibility to light damage varied with time of day, the degree to which
melatonin increased the degree of damage appeared unaffected by the time of
day. These results suggest that melatonin may be involved in some aspects of
photoreceptor sensitivity to light damage.

J Neurochem 1986 Oct;47(4):1181-9. **Effects of arachidonic acid on glutamate
and gamma-aminobutyric acid uptake in primary cultures of rat cerebral
cortical astrocytes and neurons.** Yu AC, Chan PH, Fishman RA.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

