![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Altitude and Mortality**  

_Breathing pure oxygen lowers the oxygen content of tissues; breathing
rarefied air, or air with carbon dioxide, oxygenates and energizes the
tissues; if this seems upside down, it's because medical physiology has been
taught upside down. And respiratory physiology holds the key to the special
functions of all the organs, and to many of their basic pathological changes._

**_Stress, shock, inflammation, aging, and organ failure are, in important
ways, respiratory problems._**

Definitions  **Haldane effect:** Oxygen displaces carbon dioxide from
hemoglobin, in proportion to its partial (specific) pressure.  **Bohr
effect:** Carbon dioxide (or acidity) displaces oxygen from hemoglobin.
**Lactic acidemia:** The presence of lactic acid in the blood.  **Alkalosis:**
A pH of the blood above 7.4. **Acidosis:** A blood pH below 7.4. **Lactate
paradox:** The reduced production of lactic acid at a given work rate at high
altitude. Muscle work efficiency may be 50% greater at high altitude. ATP
wastage is decreased.

There are some popular medical ideas that obstruct clear thinking about
respiration. One is that high altitude deprives you of oxygen, and is likely
to be bad for people with heart disease and cancer. Another is that breathing
pure oxygen helps sick people to oxygenate their tissues while exerting less
effort in breathing. These are both exactly wrong, and the errors have been
explored in quite a few publications, but the ideas persist in the culture to
such a degree that our **_perceptions and intuitions_** have been misled,
making closely related things seem to be unrelated. In this culture, it is
hard to see that heart disease, cancer, and cataracts all involve a crucial
respiratory defect, with the production of too much lactic acid and too little
carbon dioxide, which leads to a swelling pathology **:** A pathological
retention of water. The swollen heart beats poorly, the swollen lens turns
milky, other cells divide rapidly as a result of swelling.

People who live at very high altitudes live significantly longer **;** they
have a lower incidence of cancer (Weinberg, et al., 1987) and heart disease
(Mortimer, et al., 1977), and other degenerative conditions, than people who
live near sea level. As I have written earlier, I think the lower energy
transfer from cosmic radiation is likely to be a factor in their longevity,
but several kinds of evidence indicate that it is the lower oxygen pressure
itself that makes the biggest contribution to their longevity.

Mountain sickness is a potentially deadly condition that develops in some
people when they ascend too rapidly to a high altitude. Edema of the lungs and
brain can develop rapidly, leading to convulsions and death. The standard drug
for preventing it is acetazolamide, which inhibits carbonic anhydrase and
causes carbon dioxide to be retained, creating a slight tendency toward
acidosis. This treatment probably mimics the retention of carbon dioxide that
occurs naturally in altitude adapted people. The reasons for mountain
sickness, and the reasons for the low incidence of heart disease, cancer,
cataracts, etc., at high altitude, offer clues to the prevention of death and
deterioration from many other causes.

When the weather in a particular place is cool, sunny and dry (which in itself
is very good for the health) the atmospheric pressure usually is higher than
average. Although sunny dry weather is healthful, **periods of higher pressure
correspond to an increased incidence of death** from heart disease and
strokes.

The Haldane-Bohr effect describes the fact that oxygen and carbon dioxide
destabilize each others binding to hemoglobin. When oxygen pressure is high,
the blood releases its carbon dioxide more easily. In stormy weather, or at
high altitude, the lower oxygen pressure allows the body to retain more carbon
dioxide. Carbon dioxide, produced in the cells, releases oxygen into the
tissues, relaxes blood vessels, prevents edema, eliminates ammonia, and
increases the efficiency of oxidative metabolism.

Hyperventilation, breathing excessively and causing too much carbon dioxide to
be lost, is similar to being in the presence of too much oxygen **;** its
similar to being at low altitude with high atmospheric pressure, only worse.
Therefore, the physiological events produced by hyperventilation can give us
an insight into what happens when the atmospheric pressure is low, by looking
at the events in reverse. Likewise, breathing 100% oxygen has known harmful
consequences, which are very similar to those produced by hyperventilation.

Hyperventilation is defined as breathing enough to produce respiratory
alkalosis from the loss of carbon dioxide. Lactic acid is produced in response
to the alkalosis of hyperventilation.

Breathing too much oxygen displaces too much carbon dioxide, provoking an
increase in lactic acid **;** too much lactate displaces both oxygen and
carbon dioxide. Lactate itself tends to suppress respiration.

Oxygen toxicity and hyperventilation create a systemic deficiency of carbon
dioxide. It is this carbon dioxide deficiency that makes breathing more
difficult in pure oxygen, that impairs the hearts ability to work, and that
increases the resistance of blood vessels, impairing circulation and oxygen
delivery to tissues. In conditions that permit greater carbon dioxide
retention, circulation is improved and the heart works more effectively.
Carbon dioxide inhibits the production of lactic acid, and lactic acid lowers
carbon dioxide's concentratrion in a variety of ways..

When carbon dioxide production is low, because of hypothyroidism, there will
usually be some lactate entering the blood even at rest, because adrenalin and
noradrenalin are produced in large amounts to compensate for hypothyroidism,
and the adrenergic stimulation, besides mobilizing glucose from the glycogen
stores, stimulates the production of lactate. The excess production of lactate
displaces carbon dioxide from the blood, partly as a compensation for acidity.
The increased impulse to breath (ventilatory drive) produced by adrenalin
makes the problem worse, and lactate can promote the adrenergic response, in a
vicious circle..

Since the 1920s when A. V. Hill proposed that the prolonged increase in oxygen
consumption after a short period of intense work, the oxygen debt, was
equivalent to the amount of lactic acid that had entered the circulation from
the muscles anaerobic work, and that it had to be disposed of by oxidative
processes, physiology textbooks have given the impression that lactic acid
accumulation was exactly the same as the oxygen debt. In reality, several
things are involved, especially the elevation of temperature produced by the
intense work. Increased temperature raises oxygen consumption independently of
lactic acid, and lower temperature decreases oxygen consump-tion, even when
lactic acid is present.

The idea of the oxygen debt produced by exercise or stress as being
equivalent to the accumulation of lactic acid is far from accurate, but its
true that activity increases the need for oxygen, and also increases the
tendency to accumulate lactic acid, which can then be disposed of over an
extended time, with the consumption of oxygen. This relationship between work
and lactic acidemia and oxygen deficit led to the term lactate paradox to
describe the lower production of lactic acid during maximal work at high
altitude when people are adapted to the altiude. Carbon dioxide, retained
through the Haldane effect, accounts for the lactate paradox, by inhibiting
cellular excitation and sustaining oxidative metabolism to consume lactate
efficiently.

The loss of carbon dioxide from the lungs in the presence of high oxygen
pressure, the shift toward alkalosis, by the Bohr-Haldane effect increases the
bloods affinity for oxygen, and restricts its delivery to the tissues, but
because of the abundance of oxygen in the lungs, the blood is almost competely
saturated with oxygen.

At high altitude, the slight tendency toward carbon dioxide-retention acidosis
decreases the bloods affinity for oxygen, making it more available to the
tissues. It happens that lactic acid also affects the bloods oxygen affinity,
though not as strongly as carbon dioxide. **However, lactic acid doesnt
vaporize as the blood passes through the lungs, so its effect on the lungs
ability to oxygenate the blood is the opposite of the easily exchangeable
carbon dioxides.** Besides **** dissociating oxygen from hemoglobin, lactate
also displaces carbon dioxide from its (carbamino) binding sites on
hemoglobin. If it does this in hemoglobin, it probably does it in many other
places in the body.

According to Meerson, ascending more than 200 feet per day produces measurable
stress. People seldom notice the effects of ascending a few thousand feet in a
day, but it has been found that a large proportion of people have bleeding
into the retina when they ascend to 10,000 feet without adequate adaptation.
Presumably, similar symptomless bleeding occurs in other organs, but the
retina can be easily inspected.

If hypothyroid people, with increased adrenalin and lactate, are
hyperventilating even at rest and at sea level, when they go to a high
altitude where less oxygen is available, and their absorption of oxygen is
impaired by lactic acidemia, **their oxygen debt, conceived as circulating
lactic acid, is easily increased, intensifying their already excessive
ventilatory drive, and in proportion to the lactic acid oxygen debt, oxygen
absorption is further inhibited.**

The lactic acid has to be disposed of, but their ability to extract oxygen is
reduced. The poor oxygenation, and the increased lactic acid and free fatty
acids cause blood vessels to become leaky, producing edema in the lungs and
brain. **This is very similar to the multiple organ failure that occurs in
inflammatory conditions, bacteremia, congestive heart failure, cancer, and
trauma.**

**Otto Warburg established that lactic acid production even in the presence of
oxygen is a fundamental property of cancer.** It is, to a great degree, the
lactic acid which triggers the defensive reactions of the organism, leading to
tissue wasting from excessive glucocorticoid hormone. The cancers production
of lactic acid creates the same kind of internal imbalance produced by
hyperventilation, and if we look at the physiology of hyperventilation in the
light of Warburgs description of cancer, hyperventilation imitates cancer
metabolism, by producing lactic acid even in the presence of oxygen.
Lactate, a supposedly benign metabolite of the cancer cells, which appears in
all the other degenerative conditions, including obesity, diabetes,
Alzheimers disease, multiple sclerosis, is itself a central factor in the
degenerative process.

Working out the mechanisms involved in susceptibility to altitude sickness
will clarify the issues involved in the things that cause most people to die.
At first, all of these changes occur in the regulatory systems, and so can be
corrected.

The vitality of the mitochondria, their capacity for oxidative energy
production, is influenced by nutrition and hormones. In healthy people,
mitochondria work efficiently at almost any altitude, but people with damaged
or poorly regulated mitochondria are extremely susceptible to stress and
hyperventilation. Progesterone, testosterone, and thyroid (T3 and T2) are
protective of normal mitochondrial function, by both local and systemic
effects.

The changes that occur in malnutrition and hypothyroidism affect the
mitochondria in a multitude of ways, besides the local effects of the thyroid
and progesterone deficiency.

Increased estrogen, nitric oxide, excitatory amino acids, cortisol, lactate,
free unsaturated fatty acids, prolactin, growth hormone, histamine, serotonin,
tumor necrosis factor and other pro-inflammatory cytokines and kinins, and a
variety of prostaglandins and eicosanoids, have been identified as anti-
mitochondrial, anti-respiratory agents. Edema itself can be counted among
these agents. **** (Carbon dioxide itself directly reduces tissue edema, as
can be seen in studies of the cornea.) **Thyroid, progesterone, magnesium,
glucose, and saturated fatty acids are among the central protective
elements.**  

The similarity of the changes occurring under the influence of estrogen
excess, oxygen deprivation, aging, and ionizing radiation are remarkable.
People who think that radiations biological effects are mainly on the DNA,
and that estrogen acts through estrogen receptors, arent interested in the
parallels, but the idea of a common respiratory defect, activating common
pathways, suggests that there is something useful in the perception that
irradiation, hypoxia, and aging have estrogenic effects.

Irradiation by ultraviolet, gamma, or x-rays, and even by blue light, is
damaging to mitochondrial respiration. All of the ionizing radiations produce
immediate and lingering edema, which continues to damage metabolism in a more
or less permanent way, apart from any detectable mutagenic actions. The amount
of water taken up following irradiation can be 20% to 30% of the normal
weight, which is similar to the amount of swelling that intense work produces
in a muscle, and to the weight increase under hormonal imbalances. The energy
changes produced by irradiation in, for example, the heart, appear to
accelerate the changes produced by aging. Since unsaturated fats accumulate in
the respiratory system with aging, and are targets for radiation damage, the
involvement of these fats in all sorts of antirespiratory degenerative
processes deserves more attention. Darkness, like irradiation, excess lactate,
and unsaturated fats, has the diabetes-like effect of greatly reducing the
ability of muscle to absorb sugar, while light stimulates respiration..

When the ideas of stress, respiratory defect, and hyperventilation are
considered together, they seem practically interchangeable.

The presence of lactic acid, which indicates stress or defective respiration,
interferes with energy metabolism in ways that tend to be self-promoting.
Harry Rubins experiments demonstrated that cells become cancerous before
genetic changes appear. **The mere presence of lactic acid can make cells more
susceptible to the transformation into cancer cells.** (Mothersill, et al.,
1983.) The implications of this for the increased susceptibility to cancer
during stress, and for the increased resistance to cancer at high altitude,
are obvious.

Blocking the production of lactic acid can make cells more resistant (Seymour
and Mothersill, 1988) **;** if lactic acid were merely a useful fuel, its
hard to see how poisoning its formation could improve cell survival. But it
happens to be an energy-disruptive fuel, interfering with carbon dioxide
metabolism, among other things.

Hyperventilation is present in hypothyroidism, and is driven by adrenalin,
lactate, and free fatty acids. Free fatty acids and lactate impair glucose
use, and promote edema, especially in the lungs. Edema in the lungs limits
oxygen absorption. Swelling of the brain, resulting from increased vascular
permeability and the entry of free fatty acids, reduces its circulation and
oxygenation **;** lactic acidemia causes swelling of glial cells. Swelling of
the endothelium increases vascular resistance by making the channel narrower,
eventually affecting all organs. Cells of the immune system release tumor
necrosis factor and other inflammatory cytokines, and the bowel becomes more
permeable, allowing endotoxin and even bacteria to enter the blood. Endotoxin
impairs mitochondria, increases estrogen levels, causes Kupffer cells in the
liver to produce more tumor necrosis factor, etc.. Despite its name, tumor
necrosis factor stimulates the growth and metastasis of some types of cancer.
Dilution of the body fluids, which occurs in hypothyroidsim, hyperestrogenism,
etc., stimulates tumor growth.

The inflammatory factors that can promote cell growth can, with just slight
variation, deplete cellular energy to the extent that the cells die from the
energetic cost of the repair process, or mutate from defective repairs.
Niacinamide can have an antiinflammatory function, preventing death from
multiple organ failure, by interupting the reactions to nitric oxide and
peroxynitrile (Cuzzocrea, et al., 1999). The cells type, environment, and
history determine the different outcomes.

Cataracts, cancer, congestive heart failure, seemingly such different
degenerative problems, have the same sort of metabolic problem, leading to the
abnormal absorption of water by cells, disrupting their normal functions.

The same simple metabolic therapies, such as thyroid, progesterone, magnesium,
and carbon dioxide, are appropriate for a great range of seemingly different
diseases. Other biochemicals, such as adenosine and niacinamide, have more
specific protective effects, farther downstream in the "cascade" effects of
stress.

There are many little cliches in the medical culture that prevent serious
thought about integral therapy **:** Progesterone is the pregnancy hormone,
thyroid makes your heart work too hard, thyroid uncouples mitochondrial
phosphorylation, magnesium has nothing to do with thyroid or progesterone,
lactate provides energy, etc. But many of these minor cliches are held in
place by deep theoretical errors about the nature of cells and organisms. Once
those have been corrected, there should be progress toward more powerful
integral therapies.  

REFERENCES

Cell Biol Int Rep 1983 Nov;7(11):971-80. **Lactate-mediated changes in growth
morphology and transformation frequency of irradiated C3H 10T1/2 cells.**
Mothersill C, Seymour CB, Moriarty M. Treatment of mammalian cells with
lactate or inhibitors of glycolysis alters their radiation response,
particularly in the low dose region of the dose response curve. The occurrence
of **both high lactate levels and high glycolytic metabolism in tumours** is
well known and therefore the effect of lactate on a cell line sensitive to
radiation induced transformation was examined using a single exposure to
Cobalt 60 gamma rays as the carcinogen challenge. The results indicate that
cells treated with **5mM lactate before irradiation exhibit changes in
morphology and growth rate and that the transformation frequency is increased
by three to ten fold following 24 hours lactate treatment just prior to
irradiation.** Examination of radiation survival curves showed a positive
correlation between transformation frequency and size of the shoulder, but
increasing transformation frequency was associated with a decrease in Do. A
mechanism involving altered Redox potential in lactate treated cells is
suggested. The results are discussed in terms of their possible significance
for radiotherapy.

**Radiat Environ Biophys 1988;27(1):49-57. The effect of glycolysis**
**inhibitors on the radiation response of CHO-K1 cells. Seymour CB, Mothersill
C Saint Luke's Hospital, Rathgar, Dublin, Ireland. Exposure of CHO-K1 cells to
three different inhibitors of glycolysis, prior to treatment with a single
dose of ionising radiation, reduced their survival. The effects were
concentration-dependent but occurred under all conditions where cells were
exposed to the inhibitors prior to irradiation. The results are similar to
those obtained by this group when glycolysis was altered using analogues of
D-glucose or by blocking the pyruvate----lactate reaction using added lactate
or oxamate. They support data from other workers suggesting a role for energy
metabolism in the final expression of radiation damage.**

Crit Care Med 1999 Aug;27(8):1517-23. **Protective effect of poly(ADP-ribose)
synthetase inhibition on multiple organ failure after zymosan-induced
peritonitis in the rat.** Cuzzocrea S, Zingarelli B, Costantino G, Sottile A,
Teti D, Caputi AP

Eur J Cancer 1975 May;11(5):365-371. **Cancer and altitude. Does intracellular
pH regulate cell division?** Burton AC. ****

**Monaldi Arch Chest Dis 1999 Aug;54(4):365-72. The pathophysiology of
hyperventilation syndrome. Folgering H.** Dept Pulmonology Dekkerswald,
University of Nijmegen, Groesbeek, The Netherlands.. **Hyperventilation is
defined as breathing in excess of the metabolic needs of the body, eliminating
more carbon dioxide than is produced, and, consequently, resulting in
respiratory alkalosis and an elevated blood pH.** The traditional definition
of hyperventilation syndrome describes "a syndrome, characterized by a variety
of somatic symptoms induced by physiologically inappropriate hyperventilation
and usually reproduced by voluntary hyperventilation". The spectrum of
symptoms ascribed to hyperventilation syndrome is extremely broad, aspecific
and varying. They stem from virtually every tract, and can be caused by
physiological mechanisms such as low Pa,CO2, or the **increased sympathetic
adrenergic tone.** Psychological mechanisms also contribute to the
symptomatology, or even generate some of the symptoms. Taking the traditional
definition of hyperventilation syndrome as a starting point, there should be
three elements to the diagnostic criterion: 1) the patient should
hyperventilate and have low Pa,CO2, 2) somatic diseases causing
hyperventilation should have been excluded, and 3) the patient should have a
number of complaints which are, or have been, related to the hypocapnia.
Recent studies have questioned the tight relationship between hypocapnia and
complaints. However, the latter can be maintained and/or elicited when
situations in the absence of hypocapnia in which the first hyperventilation
and hypocapnia was present recur. Thus, the main approach to diagnosis is the
detection of signs of (possible) dysregulation of breathing leading to
hypocapnia. The therapeutic approach to hyperventilation syndrome has several
stages and/or degrees of intervention: psychological counselling,
physiotherapy and relaxation, and finally drug therapy. Depending on the
severity of the problem, one or more therapeutic strategies can be chosen.

N Engl J Med 1977 Mar 17;296(11):581-585. **Reduction in mortality from
coronary heart disease in men residing at high altitude.** Mortimer EA Jr,
Monson RR, MacMahon B In New Mexico, where inhabited areas vary from 914 to
over 2135 m above sea level, we compared age-adjusted mortality rates for
arteriosclerotic heart disease for white men and women for the years 1957-1970
in five sets of counties, grouped by altitude in 305-m (1000-foot) increments.
The results show a serial decline in mortality from the lowest to the highest
altitude for males but not for females. Mortality rates for males residing in
the county groups higher than 1220 m in order of ascending altitude **were 98,
90, 86 and 72 per cent of that for the county group below 1220-m altitude (P
less than 0.0001).** The results do not appear to be explained by artifacts in
ascertainment, variations in ethnicity or urbanization. A possible explanation
of the trend is that adjustment to residence at high altitude is incomplete
and daily activities therefore represent greater exercise than when undertaken
at lower altitudes.

Br Med J 1980 Jan 5;280(6206):5. Cardiovascular mortality and altitude.

Radiat Res 1987 Nov;112(2):381-390. **Altitude, radiation, and mortality from
cancer and heart disease.** Weinberg CR, Brown KG, Hoel DG. The variation in
background radiation levels is an important source of information for
estimating human risks associated with low-level exposure to ionizing
radiation. Several studies conducted in the United States, correlating
mortality rates for cancer with estimated background radiation levels, found
an unexpected inverse relationship. Such results have been interpreted as
suggesting that low levels of ionizing radiation may actually confer some
benefit. An environmental factor strongly correlated with background radiation
is altitude. Since there are important physiological adaptations associated
with breathing thinner air, such changes may themselves influence risk. We
therefore fit models that simultaneously incorporated altitude and background
radiation as predictors of mortality. The **negative correlations with
background radiation** seen for **mortality from arteriosclerotic heart
disease and cancers of the lung, the intestine, and the breast** disappeared
or became positive once altitude was included in the models. **By contrast,
the significant negative correlations with altitude persisted with adjustment
for radiation. Interpretation of these results is problematic, but recent
evidence implicating reactive forms of oxygen in carcinogenesis and
atherosclerosis may be relevant. We conclude that the cancer correlational
studies carried out in the United States using vital statistics data do not in
themselves demonstrate a lack of carcinogenic effect of low radiation levels,
and that reduced oxygen pressure of inspired air may be protective against
certain causes of death.**

Biull Eksp Biol Med 1993 Jun;115(6):576-578. **[The effect of high-altitude
ecological and experimental stresses on the thrombocyte-vascular wall
system].** [Article in Russian]. Bekbolotova AK, Lemeshenko VA, Aliev MA.
Experiments in animals (rats) and examinations of the population of high-
altitude shepherds were used to study the functional system "Thrombocytes-
Vessel Wall" (STVW) for evaluation of the organism ecological adaptation to
"pure" high-altitude stress, with and without combination with experimental-
adrenergic cardionecrosogenic stress (ACNS, in rats). The adaptive increase of
antiaggregation prostacyclin activity of the aorta in rats and PGI2 reaction
of vessels in human population of high-altitude in mountains (2000, 3000-3500
m) were found to be a common biologist regularity. The **adaptive increase of
coronary reserve of the heart and vasodilatator-antiaggregation status in
high-altitude shepherds correlated with an increase of antiaggregation
activity of the aorta and decrease of spontaneous aggregation of the
thrombocytes in rats under conditions of more prolonged adaptation to high-
altitude ecological stress.**

Diabetologia 1982 Jun;22(6):493. **Measurement of glycosylated haemoglobin at
high altitudes.** Paisey R, Valles V, Arredondo G, Wong B, Lozano-Castaneda O.

**[Change in the ultrastructure of rat myocardium under the influence of
12-months' adaptation to high altitude]** Zhaparov B; Mirrakhimov MM. Biull
Eksp Biol Med, 1977 Jul, 84:7, 109-12. The right and left ventricle myocardium
of rats was studied in the course of a 12-month period of adaptation to high
altitude (3200 m above the sea level). A long-term exposure of the animals to
the high altitude led the development of ventricular hypertrophy mostly of the
right, and partly of the left ventricle. **Hyperplasia and hypertrophy of
individual organellae, particularly mitochondria** , were found in most
cardiomyocytes of both ventricles. In animals adapted to the high altitude the
mitochondrial succinic dehydrogenase activity was more pronounced than in
control ones. The results obtained testified to the enhanced intracellular
metabolism reflecting myocardial compensatory adaptive responses.

**[Morphologic characteristics of the hearts of argali continuously dwelling
at high mountain altitudes]** , Zhaparov B; Kamitov SKh; Mirrakhimov MM, Biull
Eksp Biol Med, 1980 Apr, 89 **:** 4, 498-501 The hearts of argali [wild sheep]
living at 3800-5000 m above the sea level were examined. **Macroscopy showed
complete absence of fatty tissue under the epicardium.** Increased number of
the capillaries surrounding cardiomyocytes, intercalated discs in many zones
of the myocardium, sharp thickening giving pronounced cross lines of
myofibrils were revealed on semithin and ultrathin sections. The data obtained
demonstrate specificity of the heart structure of argali and are **discussed
from the standpoint of increased compensatory-adaptive changes in the test
organ, these changes being associated with its enhanced function provoked by
high altitude conditions.**

J Dev Physiol 1990 Sep;14(3):139-46. **Effect of lactate and beta-
hydroxybutyrate infusions on brain metabolism in the fetal sheep.** Harding
JE, Charlton VE Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San
Francisco 94143. Brain uptake of substrates other than glucose has been
demonstrated in neonatal but not fetal animals in vivo. This study was
undertaken to investigate the ability of the fetal sheep brain to use
potential alternative substrates when they were provided in increased amounts.
Brain substrate uptake was measured in chronically catheterised fetal sheep
during 2-h infusions of neutralised lactate (n = 12) or beta-hydroxybutyrate
(n = 12). **Despite large increases in fetal arterial lactate and beta-
hydroxybutyrate during the respective infusions, no significant uptake of
either substrate was demonstrated. However during both types of infusion, the
brain arterio-venous difference for glucose decreased 30% (P less than 0.05).
Since the brain arterio-venous difference for oxygen was unchanged, and blood
flow to the cerebral hemispheres (measured in 11 studies) was also unchanged,
the infusions appeared to cause a true decrease in brain glucose uptake. This
decrease paralleled the rise in lactate concentration during lactate
infusions, and the rise in lactate and butyrate** concentrations during the
butyrate infusions. Both substrates have metabolic actions that may inhibit
brain glucose uptake. **We speculate that the deleterious effects of high
lactate and ketone states in the perinatal period may in part be due to
inhibition of brain glucose uptake.**

Hypertens 1995 Feb;9(2):119-22. **Pressor effect of hyperventilation in
healthy subjects.** Todd GP, Chadwick IG, Yeo WW, Jackson PR, Ramsay LE
University Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Sheffield, UK Hyperventilation is an important feature of panic
disorder, and an association has been reported between panic disorder and
hypertension. We have examined the effect of hyperventilation on the blood
pressure (BP) of healthy subjects. Twenty six subjects were randomised in a
balanced two-period cross-over study to compare the effects of
hyperventilation with that of normal breathing on sitting BP, heart rate and
the electrocardiogram. Each study phase lasted 40 min, with 15 min of baseline
observation, 5 min of hyperventilation or normal breathing, and 20 min of
continued **observation. Hyperventilation significantly increased SBP by 8.9
mm Hg (95% CI 3.8-13.8, P < 0.01), diastolic blood pressure by 8.2 mm Hg (95%
CI 1.7-14.7, P < 0.05), mean arterial pressure by 10.0 mm Hg (95% CI 3.3-16.7,
P < 0.01) and heart rate by 36 beats/min (95% CI 31-44, P < 0.01). The changes
in diastolic and mean arterial pressure correlated significantly with the
total** volume of air expired during hyperventilation (r = 0.57, p < 0.01 and
r = 0.50 P < 0.01, Arch Biol Med Exp (Santiago) 1989 Dec;22(4):379-85
Pulmonary response to free fatty acid intravenous infusion in the rabbit: role
of leukotrienes and the effect of prostacyclin. Arenas G, Del Buono R, Oyarzun
MJ, Donoso P, Quijada D Departamento de Ciencias Preclinicas, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago. **Intravenous infusion of free fatty
acid (FFA) 20 mg.kg-1.min-1 produces pulmonary edema, hypoxemia,
hyperventilation and increase in the alveolar surfactant content in rabbits in
less than 15** min.

Respiration 1986;49(3):187-94. **Role of hypocapnia in the alveolar surfactant
increase induced by free fatty acid intravenous infusion in the rabbit.**
Oyarzun MJ, Donoso P, Quijada D **. Intravenous infusion of free fatty acid
(FFA) produces an increase in the alveolar surfactant pool of the rabbit and
pulmonary edema, hyperventilation, hypoxemia and hypocapnia. Previous studies
suggested that alveolar PCO2 would be a regulator of intracellular storages of
surfactant. In order to** study the role of hypocapnia in the increase of lung
surfactant in our experiments we administered 20 mg FFA X kg-1 X min-1 i.v. to
rabbits breathing room air (n = 10) or 5% CO2, 21% O2, 74% N2 (n = 7).
Disaturated phosphatidylcholine (DSPC) was determined in bronchial-alveolar
lavage fluid as index of alveolar surfactant content, 5% CO2 in the inspired
air prevented the hypocapnia and blocked the increase in DSPC induced by FFA
(p less than 0.01). Pulmonary edema post-FFA was not changed by 5% CO2
administration. We conclude that hypocapnia produced by hyperventilation
during FFA infusion would be an important factor in the increase of DSPC
observed after FFA infusion.

Farmakol Toksikol 1977. Sep-Oct; 40(5):620-3.. **[Effect of combinations of
apressin, obsidan, diprazin, adenosine, NAD and nicotinamide on the resistance
of rats to hypoxia and on carbohydrate metabolic indices].** [Article in
Russian] Abakumov GZ As evidenced from experiments on rats, a combined
application of apressin with obsidan and diprazine, and also of adenozine with
nicotine-amidadenine-dinucleotide (NAD), as well as of adeozine with nicotine
amide potentiates the protective effect of these substances in hypobaric
hypoxia, increases the resistance of the animals to cerebral ischemia,
**brings down the excess lactate level and raises the redoz potential of the
system lactic-acid-pyruvic** acid in the brain of rats exposed to the effects
of rarefied atmosphere.

Schweiz Med Wochenschr 1977 Nov 5;107(44):1585-6. **[Protective effect of
pyridoxilate on the hypoxic myocardium. Experimental studies].** [Article in
French] Moret PR, Lutzen U The protective action of piridoxilate on hypoxic
myocardium has been studied on rats in acute hypoxia (isolated heart, perfused
with a non-oxygenated solution) and in prolonged hypoxia (3 days at high [3454
m] altitude). Piridoxilate maintained a higher ATP level with a much lower
production of lactate. **The mechanisms of action of piridoxilate are probably
fairly similar to those of Na dichloracetate**.

J. Appl Physiol 1991 Apr;70(4):1720-30. . **Metabolic and work efficiencies
during exercise in Andean natives.** Hochachka PW, Stanley C, Matheson GO,
McKenzie DC, Allen PS, Parkhouse WS Department of Zoology, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. **Maximum O2 and CO2 fluxes during
exercise were less perturbed by hypoxia in Quechua natives** from the Andes
than in lowlanders. In exploring how this was achieved, we found that, **for a
given work rate, Quechua highlanders at 4,200 m accumulated substantially less
lactate** than lowlanders at sea level normoxia (approximately 5-7 vs. 10-14
mM) despite hypobaric hypoxia. This phenomenon, known as the lactate paradox,
was entirely refractory to normoxia-hypoxia transitions. In lowlanders, the
lactate paradox is an acclimation; however, in Quechuas, the lactate paradox
is an expression of metabolic organization that did not deacclimate, at least
over the 6-wk period of our study. Thus it was concluded that this metabolic
organization is a developmentally or genetically fixed characteristic selected
because of the **efficiency advantage of aerobic metabolism (high ATP yield
per mol of substrate metabolized) compared with anaerobic glycolysis.**
Measurements of respiratory quotient indicated preferential use of
carbohydrate as fuel for muscle work, which is also advantageous in hypoxia
because it maximizes the yield of ATP per mol of O2 consumed. Finally,
minimizing the cost of muscle work was also reflected in energetic efficiency
as classically defined (power output per metabolic power input); **this was
evident at all work rates but was most pronounced at submaximal work rates
(efficiency approximately 1.5 times higher than in lowlander athletes).**
Because plots of power output vs. metabolic power input did not extrapolate to
the origin, it was concluded 1) that exercise in both groups sustained a
significant ATP expenditure not convertible to mechanical work but 2) that
this expenditure was downregulated in Andean natives by thus far unexplained
mechanisms.

Br J Anaesth 1975 Jun;47(6):669-78. **Effect of CO2 on myocardial
contractility and aortic input impedance during anaesthesia.** Foex P, Prys-
Roberts C. The haemodynamic responses to hypocapnia and hypercapnia have been
studied in the dog during intermittent positive pressure ventilation under
halothane anaesthesia (1% halothane in oxygen) and under nitrous oxide
anaesthesia (30% oxygen in nitrous oxide). In the absence of significant
**variations of either myocardial contractility or left ventricular end-
diastolic pressure, the changes of stroke volume and cardiac output
(diminution because of hypocapnia, augmentation because of hypercapnia) were
determined by alterations of systemic vascular resistance (augmentation
because of hypocapnia, diminution because of hypercapnia).**

J Appl Physiol 1991 May;70(5):1963-76. **Skeletal muscle metabolism and work
capacity: a 31P-NMR study of Andean natives and lowlanders.** Matheson GO,
Allen PS, Ellinger DC, Hanstock CC, Gheorghiu D, McKenzie DC, Stanley C,
Parkhouse WS, Hochachka PW Sports Medicine Division, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Two metabolic features of altitude-adapted humans
are the **maximal O2 consumption (VO2max) paradox (higher work rates following
acclimatization without increases in VO2max)** and the lactate paradox
(progressive reductions in muscle and blood lactate with exercise at
increasing altitude). To

J Hum Hypertens 1995 Feb;9(2):119-22. **Pressor effect of hyperventilation in
healthy subjects.** Todd GP, Chadwick IG, Yeo WW, Jackson PR, Ramsay LE.

J Infect Dis 1998 May;177(5):1418-21. **The effect of lactic acid on
mononuclear cell secretion of proinflammatory cytokines in response to group B
streptococci.** Steele PM, Augustine NH, Hill HR Department of Pathology,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84132, USA. **This study
found that lactate alone had a stimulatory effect (207.1 +/- 16.3%; P = .001)
on tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha production by human mononuclear cells
with the most profound secretion being at pathologic concentrations of 4-8 mM
lactate. Furthermore, exposure of these mononuclear cells to group B
streptococci (GBS, 10(5) cfu) resulted in TNF-alpha production of up to 621.1
+/- 42% of control; the combination of lactic acid and GBS increased TNF-alpha
production up to 1019.3 +/- 16.1% (P = .001). The combination of GBS and
lactate also enhanced the secretion of interleukin (IL)-1beta and IL-6.
Lactate in pathologic concentrations, therefore, likely enhances the secretion
of these inflammatory mediators and contributes to septic shock and meningitis
caused by GBS.**

J Appl Physiol 1994 Apr;76(4):1462-7 **.** Lactic acidosis as a facilitator of
oxyhemoglobin dissociation during exercise. Stringer W, Wasserman K, Casaburi
R, Porszasz J, Maehara K, French W.

**Involvement of nitric oxide and N-methyl- D-aspartate in acute hypoxic
altitude convulsion in mice.** Chen CH; Chen AC; Liu HJ. Aviat Space Environ
Med, 1997 Apr, 68:4, 296-9. Altitude convulsion is a rather specific form of
experimental convulsion which is induced by acute exposure to a hypobaric
hypoxic condition. Several neurotransmitters have been shown to be involved in
the mechanisms of altitude convulsions. The novel neurotransmitter nitric
oxide (NO) may be involved in the mechanisms of altitude convulsion through
its neuronal signalling roles in relation to the NMDA receptor. **NO
synthesis precursor, L-arginine (20, 40, 200, 800 mg/kg), resulted in a dose-
dependent decrease in the ACT in mice, while the NO synthase (NOS) inhibitor,
NG-nitro-L-arginine-methyl ester (L-NAME, 1.25, 2.50, 5.00 mg/kg, i.p.)
increased the ACT.** CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest an important
signalling role for nitric oxide and NMDA in the development of altitude
convulsion and further support the hypothesized relationship between NMDA-
receptor mediated neurotoxicity and nitric oxide. ****

**Excitotoxicity in the lung: N-methyl-D-aspartate- induced, nitric oxide-
dependent, pulmonary edema is attenuated by vasoactive intestinal peptide and
by inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.** Said SI; Berisha HI; Pakbaz H.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1996 May 14, 93:10, 4688-92. **Excitatory amino
acid toxicity, resulting from overactivation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
glutamate receptors, is a major mechanism of neuronal cell death in acute and
chronic neurological diseases. We have investigated whether excitotoxicity may
occur in peripheral organs, causing tissue injury, and report that NMDA
receptor activation in perfused, ventilated rat lungs triggered acute injury,
marked by increased pressures needed to ventilate and perfuse the lung, and by
high-permeability edema."** The injury was prevented by competitive NMDA
receptor antagonists or by channel-blocker MK-801, and **was reduced in the
presence of Mg2+.** As with NMDA toxicity to central neurons, the lung injury
was nitric oxide (NO) dependent: it **required L-arginine, was associated with
increased production of NO,** and was attenuated by either of two NO synthase
inhibitors. The neuropeptide **** vasoactive intestinal peptide and
**inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase also prevented this injury, but
without inhibiting NO synthesis, both acting by inhibiting a toxic action of
NO that is critical to tissue injury.** The findings indicate that: (i) NMDA
receptors exist in the lung (and probably elsewhere outside the central
nervous system), (ii) excessive activation of these receptors may provoke
acute edematous lung injury as seen in the "adult respiratory distress
syndrome," and (iii) this injury can be modulated by blockade of one of three
critical steps: NMDA receptor binding, inhibition of NO synthesis, or
activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.

**Adenosine modulates N-methyl-D- aspartate- stimulated hippocampal nitric
oxide production in vivo.** Bhardwaj A; Northington FJ; Koehler RC; Stiefel T;
Hanley DF; Traystman RJ. Stroke, 1995 Sep, 26:9, 1627-33. "Adenosine acts
presynaptically to inhibit release of excitatory amino acids (EAAs) and is
thus considered to be neuroprotective. Because EAA-stimulated synthesis of
nitric oxide (NO) may play an important role in long-term potentiation and
excitotoxic-mediated injury, we tested the hypotheses that adenosine agonists
attenuate basal and EAA-induced NO production in the hippocampus in vivo and
that adenosine A1 receptors mediate this response." "...these data are
consistent with in vitro results showing that NMDA receptor stimulation
enhances NO production. Furthermore, we conclude that stimulation of A1
receptors can attenuate the basal as well as NMDA-induced production of NO.
Because NMDA receptor stimulation amplifies glutamate release, our data are
consistent with presynaptic A1 receptor-mediated inhibition of EAA release and
consequent downregulation of NO production."

Anesthesiology 1993 Jan;78(1):91-9. **Hypocapnia worsens arterial blood
oxygenation and increases VA/Q heterogeneity in canine pulmonary edema.**
Domino KB, Lu Y, Eisenstein BL, Hlastala MP. University of Washington Medical
School, Seattle. "Hyperventilation frequently is employed to reduce carbon
dioxide partial pressure in patients in the operating room and intensive care
unit. However the effect of hypocapnia on oxygenation is complex and may
result in worsening in patients with preexisting intrapulmonary shunt." "Both
hypocapnia and hypercapnia were associated with an increased VA/Q inequality.
However, PaO2 decreased and P[A-a]O2 increased with only hypocapnia. These
results suggest that hyperventilation to reduce PaCO2 may be detrimental to
arterial PO2 in some patients with lung disease."

**Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1996 Jan;40(1):133-4 Hyperlactatemia associated with
hypocarbic hyperventilation. Cheung PY**

Am J Physiol 1999 May;276(5 Pt 1):E922-9 Hyperlactatemia reduces muscle
glucose uptake and GLUT-4 mRNA while increasing (E1alpha)PDH gene expression
in rat. Lombardi AM, Fabris R, Bassetto F, Serra R, Leturque A, Federspil G,
Girard J, Vettor R Endocrine Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, University of Padova, 35100 Padova, Italy. **An increased
basal plasma lactate concentration is present in many physiological and
pathological conditions, including obesity and diabetes. We previously
demonstrated that acute lactate infusion in rats produced a decrease in
overall glucose uptake.** The present study was carried out to further
investigate the effect of lactate on glucose transport and utilization in
skeletal muscle. In chronically catheterized rats, a 24-h sodium lactate or
bicarbonate infusion was performed. To study glucose uptake in muscle, a bolus
of 2-deoxy-[3H]glucose was injected in basal condition and during euglycemic-
hyperinsulinemic clamp. Our results show that hyperlactatemia decreased
glucose uptake in muscles (i.e., red quadriceps; P < 0.05). Moreover in red
muscles, both GLUT-4 mRNA (-30% in red quadriceps and -60% in soleus; P <
0.025) and protein (-40% in red quadriceps; P < 0.05) were decreased, whereas
the (E1alpha)pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) mRNA was increased (+40% in red
quadriceps; P < 0.001) in lactate-infused animals. PDH protein was also
increased (4-fold in red gastrocnemius and 2-fold in red quadriceps). These
results indicate that **chronic hyperlactatemia** reduces glucose uptake by
affecting the expression of genes involved in glucose metabolism in muscle,
suggesting a role for lactate in t **he development of insulin resistance.**

Radiat Res 1993 Apr;134(1):79-85 **Effects of in vivo heart irradiation on
myocardial energy metabolism in rats.** Franken NA, Hollaar L, Bosker FJ, van
Ravels FJ, van der Laarse A, Wondergem J Department of Clinical Oncology,
University Hospital, Leiden, The Netherlands. To investigate the effect of in
vivo heart irradiation on myocardial energy metabolism, we measured myocardial
adenosine nucleotide concentrations and mitochondrial oxygen consumption in
left ventricular tissue of rats 0-16 months after local heart irradiation (20
Gy). At 24 h and 2 months no difference in myocardial adenosine nucleotide
concentration was apparent between irradiated and control hearts. The total
myocardial adenosine nucleotide concentrations in irradiated hearts compared
to those of nonirradiated controls tended to be lower from 4 months onward.
The rate of **oxidative energy production (state 3 respiration) in irradiated
hearts was significantly reduced ompared with that of age-matched controls
from 2 months onward. Moreover, as a result of aging, time-dependent decrease
in the rate of oxidative energy production was observed in both rradiated and
control hearts** (P < 0.001). The respiratory control index (RCI = oxygen
consumption n state 3/oxygen consumption in state 4) in irradiated hearts was
not different from the RCI easured in age-matched control animals. During the
period of study the RCI diminished significantly wth age in both groups (P <
0.005). The number of oxygen atoms used per molecule of ADP phosphorylated
(P/O ratio) was not influenced by the irradiation. The P/O ratio for the
AD(+)-linked substrates remained unchanged at a value of about 3 during the
period studied. At 6 months after irradiation activities of myocardial enzymes
such as lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, citrate synthase, and
cytochrome c oxidase were reduced. The reduction in myocardial energy
production and the **changes in energy supplies provide a mechanism to explain
impaired contractility after local heart irradiation.**

J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 1993 Sep;34(3):195-203. **Radiosensitization of human
lung fibroblasts by chemical that decrease ATP levels.** Kumar A, Kimura H,
Aoyama T. **"Radiosensitization by lactate, pyruvate, nalidixic acid and
novobiocin was studied in exponentially growing SH-18L human lung fibroblasts.
All the chemicals had a slight radiosensitizing effect at a low concentration
and a definite effect at a higher one." "Fibroblasts incubated with the low
concentration of each chemical for 24 hrs after X irradiation showed no
reduction in intracellular ATP content, whereas, the higher concentration
produced a significant decrease.** These observations suggest that the
decrease in the ATP content may be involved in the radiosensitization of human
fibroblasts at high concentrations of these chemicals. **In contrast,
radiosensitization at a low concentration is not explained by a relationship
to ATP content. Different mechanisms may be involved in radiosensitization at
low and high concentrations of these chemicals."**

J Exp Med 1993 May 1;177(5):1391-8. **Enhancement of experimental metastasis
by tumor necrosis factor.** Orosz P, Echtenacher B, Falk W, Ruschoff J, Weber
D, Mannel D.N. Institute for Immunology and Genetics, German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg. "The influence of endogenous and exogenous tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) on metastasis was investigated in an experimental fibrosarcoma
metastasis model." "This effect was time dependent, as administration of rmTNF
5 h before or 1 h but not 24 h after tumor cell inoculation caused an increase
of tumor cell colony formation on the lung surface, suggesting an influence of
TNF on the vascular adhesion and diapedesis of tumor cells. Since tumor-
bearing mice showed an enhanced ability to produce TNF after endotoxin
injection compared to control mice, tumor-bearing mice were treated with anti-
mTNF antibodies. Neutralization of endogenous tumor-induced TNF led to a
significant decrease of the number of pulmonary metastases. Histological
analysis of micrometastases in the lung on day 5 by silver staining of
proteins associated with nucleolar organizer regions revealed **more
metastatic foci and augmented proliferative activity of the tumor cells
after** **rmTNF pretreatment of mice.** However, no direct effect of rmTNF on
the proliferation rate of tumor cells was seen in vitro."

Nippon Geka Gakkai Zasshi 1996 Sep;97(9):726-32. **[Energy substrate
metabolism during stress].** Sugimoto H. Department of Traumatology and
Critical Care Medicine, Osaka University School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.
**"Energy substrate metabolism during stress is characterized by increased REE
(resting energy expenditure), hyperglycemia, hyperlactatemia and protein
catabolism. This stress-induced hypermetabolic responses are closely related
to increased secretion of neurohormonal and cytokine mediators. The insulin
resistance hyperglycemia has been called "stress diabetes" or 'surgical
diabetes.' Glucose disposal has been thought to be impaired in this
condition." "This hyperglycemia in stress diabetes results from a postreceptor
mechanism. Stress hyperlactatemia is thought to be caused by decreased
pyruvate dehydrogenase activity rather than tissue hypoperfusion."**

_Clin Physiol 1995 Nov;15(6):581-95._ **_Effects of lactate infusion on
hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis._** _Haesler E, Schneiter P, Temler
E, Jequier E, Tappy L._

_Cancer Res 1993 Apr. 15;53(8):1939-44.._ ** _Tumor necrosis factor alpha as
an autocrine and paracrine growth factor for ovarian cancer: monokine
induction of tumor cell proliferation and tumor necrosis factor alpha
expression._** _Wu S, Boyer CM, Whitaker RS, Berchuck A, Wiener JR, Weinberg
JB, Bast RC Jr._

Klin Med (Mosk) 1989 May;67(5):38-41 **. ["Dry" carbon dioxide baths in
treating patients with myocardial infarction at the sanatorium stage of
rehabilitation].** [Article in Russian] Barashkova NL, Kartamysheva NL,
Krasnova VP, Kriuchkova LN, Miasoedova E.S. A group of 75 patients with a
history of myocardial infarction and repeated myocardial infarction were
subjected to treatment involving dry carbon dioxide baths. Its results
demonstrated normalization of IHD manifestations, such as coronary and heart
failure, functional state of the cardiovascular system, its reserve
potentialities and adaptation to physical effort. Under the influence of a
course treatment with dry carbon dioxide baths hemodynamic parameters of
cardiac output (cardiac and stroke volume) underwent favourable changes,
rhythm slowed down, diastole became longer and systolic and diastolic arterial
pressure decreased. The data obtained substantiate application of dry carbon
dioxide baths in the recovery period to I-III functional classes patients with
a history of myocardial infarction.

J Dev Physiol 1989 Nov;12(5):283-6. **Haemodynamic effects of respiratory
alkalosis independent of changes in airway pressure in anaesthetized newborn
dogs.** Reuter JH, Donovan EF, Kotagal U.R. **"We have recently reported a
decrease in cardiac output in newborn dogs during respiratory alkalosis which
is independent of changes in airway pressure."**

Undersea Hyperb Med 1994 Jun;21(2):169-83. **Influence of hyperbaric oxygen on
left ventricular contractility, total coronary blood flow, and myocardial
oxygen consumption in the conscious dog.** Savitt MA, Rankin JS, Elberry JR,
Owen CH, Camporesi E.M. **"It is known that hyperbaric oxygenation (HBO)
decreases total coronary blood flow (TCBF) and cardiac output (CO)."**

**_Heart rhythm disturbances in the inhabitants of mountainous regions._**
_Mirrakhimov MM; Meimanaliev TS Cor Vasa, 1981, 23:5, 359-65._ ** _"During
exercise heart arrhythmias_** ** _appeared conspicuously less frequently in
the high mountain than in the low altitude inhabitants."_**

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

