![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
The problem of Alzheimer's disease as a clue to immortality - Part 1**  

I. INTRODUCTION  

II. COMMON FACTORS IN INJURY DURING GROWTH AND AGING  

III. A VIEW OF ENTROPY--RENEWAL OF THE BRAIN  

IV. FALSE SIGNALS FROM THE ENVIRONMENT  

A. EDUCATION, DIET AND MEDICINE INTERACT

B. SIGNALS IN THE ABSTRACT  

V. HORMONE IMBALANCE, LEADING TO FAILURE OF PROTECTIVE INHIBITION AND
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE  

A. THE FUNCTION OF ENERGY

B. EFFECTS OF ESTROGEN AND UNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS

C. VITAMIN A AND STEROIDS

D. THE NATURE OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE

E. AN EXAMPLE; DIET AFFECTS HORMONES WHICH AFFECT STRUCTURE AND LEAD TO
APPARENT SELF- DESTRUCTION  

VI. STRUCTURE AS A REGULATORY SYSTEM--AN EMERGING VISION OF PERVASIVE
EPIGENESIS  

**I. INTRODUCTION**  

The toxicity of estrogen and of the unsaturated fats has been known for most
of the twentieth century, and much has been learned about their interactions
in the aging process. The body, during this time, has been understood as a
dynamic interaction of cellular trophic influences which govern both form and
function. My argument here will be that some of our adaptive, protective
regulatory processes are overridden by the excessive supply of unsaturated
fats--supported by a few other toxins--in our diet, acting as a false-signal
system, and that cholesterol, pregnenolone, and progesterone which are our
main long-range defenses, are overcome by the effects of the unsaturated fats,
and that the resulting cascade of ineffective and defective reactions
(including various estrogen-stimulated processes) leads to lower and lower
energy production, reduced function, and death. At certain times, especially
childhood and old age, iron (which also has important regulatory roles)
accumulates to the point that its signal functions may be inappropriate.  

It interacts with estrogen and unsaturated fats in ways that can change
restraint and adaptation into sudden self-destruction, apoptotic cell death.
If we look at the human organism from one perspective, it seems coherent and
intelligible, but from the perspective of established academic biological
doctrine, it seems appallingly complex, lacking any visible integrating
principle, and as a result simplistic mechanical, pharmaceutical, or religious
ideas are increasingly offered to fill the gap. But experimental data can be
taken out of the muddle, and put to coherent human use. In what follows, I am
acting as though the doctrines of genetic determination and regulation by
membranes were mere historical relics. The emerging control systems are now
clear enough that we can begin to use them to reverse the degenerative
diseases: Alzheimer's dementia, epileptic dementia, arthritis, osteoporosis,
depression, hypertension, hardening of the heart and blood vessels, diabetes,
and some types of tumor, immunodeficiencies, reflex problems, and special
atrophic problems, including clearing of amyloid and mucoid deposits. I think
many people experience regenerative age-regressing when many circumstances are
just right; for example, taking a trip to the mountains in the spring with
friends can optimize several basic regulatory systems.  

**II. COMMON FACTORS IN BRAIN INJURY DURING GROWTH AND AGING**  

Most people are surprised by the number of cells in the prenatal brain, and in
the very old brain: In the human fetus at 6 months of development, there are
about twice as many brain cells as there are at the time of birth, and in old
age the number of cells in the brain keeps increasing with age, so that at the
age of 90 the amount of DNA in the brain (36.94 grams) is about 50%.greater
than at the age of 16-20 (23.04 grams). In the aged brain, glial cells
multiply while neurons die. In the fetus, the cells that die are apparently
nerve cells that haven't yet matured. The factors that are known to reduce the
brain size at birth are also factors that are involved in the degenerating
brain in old age or Alzheimer's disease: lack of oxygen, excess unsaturated
fats or deficiency of saturated fats, estrogen excess, progesterone
deficiency, and lack of glucose. A lack of carbon dioxide is probably harmful
in both. Inflammation and blood clots may be factors in the aging brain, and
bleeding with vascular spasm is sometimes a contributing factor to brain
damage in both the old and the fetal brain. Endotoxemia may be a factor in
nerve degeneration only during adult life, but it is sometimes present during
pregnancy.  

M. C. Diamond, Enriching Heredity: The Importance of the Environment on the
Anatomy of the Brain. Free Press, N.Y., 1988. C. Finch and L. Hayflick,
Handbook of the Biology of Aging. Van Nostrand Reinhold, N.Y., 1977.  

**III. A VIEW OF ENTROPY: RENEWAL OF THE BRAIN**  

When a fertilized egg is developing into a person, each cell division creates
a new environment for the daughter cells, to which they adapt. They may run
into limits and resistances (sometimes a certain gene doesn't meet the need of
the situation, or toxins are present, or nutrients and hormones are
imperfectly supplied), but the process is flexible, and a way is normally
found to get around the limitation. The embryo's brain development is my
favorite example of the ways genes interact with the environment. We might
think of the "optimal brain development" of a person, or a rat, or a chicken,
as something which is clearly limited by "the genes." But if rats are given a
stimulating environment, each generation gets a slightly bigger, slightly more
intelligent brain. If rats are treated during pregnancy to increase the amount
of progesterone, the offspring have bigger brains and learn more efficiently.
Still, that might just be restoring a condition that was natural for rats in
some perfect environment. Chickens develop inside an egg shell, and so the
nutrients needed for their development are all present when the egg is laid.  

The brain, like the other organs, stops growing when the food supply is used
up. But an experimenter (Zamenhof) opened the egg shells at the stage of
development when the brain normally stops growing, and added glucose, and
found that the brain continued growing, producing chickens with bigger brains.
The "genes" of a chicken, as part of a system, have something to do with the
development of that system, but the environment existing in and around the
organism is able to guide and support the way the system develops. The size,
complexity, and intelligence of the brain represents a very large part of the
"information" contained in the organism, and Zamenhof's experiment showed that
the ability to realize this potential, to create this complexity, comes from
the support of the environment, and that the "genetic nature of the chicken"
didn't constitute a limit to the development of its brain.  

I am going to argue that Alzheimer's disease is analogous to the situation
confronted by the developing chicken embryo or the rat or human fetus, when
the environment is unable to meet the needs of the highly energetic, demanding
and sensitive brain cells, and the brain cells begin to die, instead of
developing into a more complex state, passing beyond various barriers and
limitations. There are two stereotypes that are in conflict with this view:
(1) That the structure of the brain is determined at an early point in life,
sometimes explicitly stated as the age of 12 or 16, and (2) that the structure
of the brain goes into an "entropic" deterioration during the process of
aging. My position is that the brain cells are in a vital developmental
process at all times, and that the same things that injure the brain of a
fetus also injure the brain of an aging person.  

If novelty is really appearing during development, then it is hard to maintain
that "entropy increases" during the development of an individual. Isn't a
child a richer organization than a fertilized egg? Isn't an adult more
individualized or realized than an infant? Seen from the inside, our known
world gets richer with experience. Learning is certainly anti-entropic. Where
does the idea of "increasing entropy with living" come from? Many things
contribute, including a doctrine of genetic determinism, the old Platonic idea
of the imperfection of the concrete, the unreality of the existent, and the
medieval idea of the "corruption of the body." These philosophies still
motivate some people in aging research. The astrophysicist, N. A. Kozyrev,
showed that the idea of an "entropic cosmos" derived simply from the
assumptions of 19th century deism, "God set the clockwork universe in motion,
and left it to run down." Early in this century, Raymond Pearl argued that the
"rate of living" governed the life-span, so that "fast living" meant a short
life. He based his argument on cantaloupe seeds: the faster they grew, the
sooner they died. This was because he didn't give them anything but water, so
they had to live on their stored energy; if they grew quickly, obviously they
ran out of stored energy sooner. I have never heard that described as a stupid
idea, but I think politeness is sometimes carried too far. In the clock
analogy, or the seed analogy, the available energy is used up.  

The clock with its wound-up spring and the seed in a dish of water may be
considered as closed systems, and we can understand their fate. But if it is
foolish to argue from a confined seed to free-living organisms, then it is
just as foolish to argue from a clock to a cosmos. Unfortunately, these
inferences about closed systems are often applied to real situations that
aren't energetically closed.

The "rate of living" theory of aging picked up the idea of aging as a natural
physical property of time, and gave it expression in mathematical form,
arguing (Hershey, "Entropy, basal metabolism and life expectancy,"
Gerontologia 7, 245-250, 1963) that "the total lifetime entropy production"
could be calculated, to give insight into "life expectancy and evolutional
development." Unfortunately, the equation Hershey used assumed that the flow
of heat out of the body into the surroundings is reversible. This suggests an
image of Dr. Frankenstein vivifying his monster with lightning, putting the
heat back into the body. If heat is to be "put back into the body," it is
necessary to make sure that it is appropriate for the structure as it exists.  

Actually, it is just the directed flow of energy which generates the
structures. If any biological argument can be made from the idea of entropy,
it is that it would be extremely difficult to regenerate food, by putting heat
into a person. In a few situations, it is possible to show that living
structures can directly absorb heat from their environment (causing the
temperature to fall)--"negative heat production"--but the exact meaning of
this isn't clear. (B. C. Abbott, et al., "The positive and negative heat
production associated with a nerve impulse," Proc. R. Soc. B 148, 149, 1958;
R. D. Keynes and J. M. Ritchie, "The initial heat production of amphibian
myelinated nerve fibres," Proc. Physiol. Soc., June 1970, page 29P-30P: "It is
now clear that in both crustacean...and mammalian (Howarth, et al., 1968) non-
myelinated fibres there is an initial production of heat during (or soon
after) the action potential, 80% of which is rapidly reabsorbed.") A. I. Zotin
("Aging and rejuvenation from the standpoint of the thermodynamics of
irreversible processes," Priroda, No. 9, 49-55, 1970), citing the theory of
Prigogine-Wiame, argued that the aging process involves both a decrease in
entropy and a decrease in the rate of heat production.  

Regeneration involves a production of entropy, as when an egg is formed. (The
temperature fluctuation at the time of ovulation might make a contribution to
the construction of the entropic egg.) The argument that aging of the animal
(like aging of the cosmos) is governed by "the tendency of entropy to
increase" has led people to say that rejuvenation would be like unscrambling
an egg. Zotin's argument is interesting, because he says that an egg is a
"scrambled animal." This view is very much like Warburg's and Szent-Gyorgyi's
theory of cancer, that it is like a reversion to a simpler state of life. To
sketch out what I have argued in different contexts, water is the part of the
living substance that we can most meaningfully discuss in terms of entropy. In
fact, much of the concept of entropy has derived from the study of water, as
it changed state in steam engines, etc. Cancer cells, like egg cells, have a
higher water content than the differentiated, functioning cells of an adult,
and the water is less rigidly ordered by the cellular molecules. This
different, more mobile state of the water, can be measured by the NMR (nuclear
magnetic resonance) machines which are used for MRI (magnetic resonance
imaging).  

Estrogen has a special place in relation to the water in an organism. It is
intimately involved with the formation of the egg cell, and wherever it
operates, it increases both the quantity of water and, apparently, the
disorder of the water. Its function, I believe, is to promote regeneration, as
in Zotin's scheme, by increasing entropy, or "scrambling the animal." The way
it promotes regeneration is by promoting water uptake, stimulating cell
division, and erasing the differentiated state to one degree or another,
providing a new supply of "stem cells," or cells at the beginning of a certain
sequence of differentiation. These more numerous cells then must find a
hospitable environment in which to develop and adapt. If the proper support
can't be found, then they will be recycled, like the unfed cells in the brain
of a fetus. If we imagine the course of development as a summary of evolution
("ontogeny recapitulating phylogeny"), then the egg, as it "unscrambles"
itself in embryonic development, passing through stages resembling jelly fish,
worm, fish, reptile, bird, baboon, keeps finding that the available energy
allows it to, in effect, say "I want this, I don't want that," until it
emerges as a human baby, saying "I want," and begins eating and learning, and
with luck continues the unscrambling, or self-actualization.. Degenerative
aging, rather than being "physically derived from the properties of time,"
seems to be produced situationally, by various types of contamination of our
energy supply. Unsaturated fats, interacting with an excess of iron and a
deficiency of oxygen or usable energy, redirect our developmental path.  

The saturated fats, in themselves, seem to have no "signalling" functions, and
when they are naturally modified by our desaturating enzymes, the substances
produced behave very differently from the plant-derived "eicosanoids." As far
as their effects have been observed, it seems that they are adaptive, rather
than dysadaptive. All of the factors that affect the brain of a fetus should
be examined in relation to the aging brain. Besides estrogen and fats, I am
thinking of oxygen and carbon dioxide, glucose, iron and calcium, cholesterol,
progesterone, pregnenolone, DHEA, the endorphins, GABA, thyroid, and vitamin
A. An additional factor, endotoxin poisoning, eventually tends to intervene
during stress and aging, exacerbating the trend begun under the influence of
the other factors.  

**IV. FALSE SIGNALS FROM THE ENVIRONMENT**  

The environment can be supportive, but it can also divert development from an
optimal course.  

Passively taking whatever you are given, by history and nature, is entropic;
choosing intelligently from possible diets, selecting courses of action, will
create pattern and reduce entropy. If education contains an element of choice
and self-actualization, then the results seen in several Alzheimer's studies
could have a significance larger than what has been suggested by the
investigators. A diagnostic bias has been reported to result from the use of
standardized tests based on vocabulary, because education increases
vocabulary, and tends to cover up the loss of vocabulary that occurs in
dementia. In the Framingham study, it was concluded that there was a real
association of lower educational level with dementia, but the suggestion was
made that self-destructive practices such as smoking were more common among
the less educated.  

The Seattle study of the patients in a health maintenance organization showed
a very distinct difference in educational level between the demented and the
non-demented, both of whom had roughly similar frequency of prescriptions for
estrogen. The features that seemed important to me, that weren't discussed by
the authors, were that the demented women had a much lower rate of progestogen
use, and a much higher incidence of hysterectomy, which interferes with
natural progesterone production. Although Brenner, et al., in the Seattle
study concluded that "this study provides no evidence that estrogen
replacement therapy has an effect on the risk of Alzheimer's disease in
postmenopausal women," they reported that "Current estrogen use of both the
oral and the vaginal routes had odds ratios below 1, while former use of both
types yielded odds ratios above 1...." (They seem to neglect the fact that
Alzheimer's-type disease in old people has a long developmental history, so it
is precisely the "former" use that is relevent. 31% of the demented women had
formerly used estrogen, and only 20% of the control group. Since estrogen is a
brain excitant, present use creates exactly the same sort of effect on verbal
fluency and other signs of awareness of the environment that a little cocaine
does. Anyone who neglects this effect is probably deliberately constructing a
propaganda study.)  

This observation, that the demented had 155% as much former estrogen use as
the normal group, as well as the difference in rates of progestogen use
(normal patients had 50% more progestogen use than demented) and hysterectomy
(demented had 44.1% vs. 17% in the normals, i.e., 259% as many; the incidence
of hysterectomies after the age of 55, which is a strong indication of a
natural excess of estrogen, in the demented was 374% of the incidence in the
non-demented), should call for a larger study to clarify these observatons,
which tend to indicate that exposure to estrogen in middle-age increases the
risk of Alzheimer's disease in old age, and that even medical progestogens
offer some protection against it..  

(Although this study might have been bigger and better, it is far better than
the junk-studies that have been promoted by the pharmaceutical publicity
machine. I have seen or heard roughly 100 mentions of the pro-estrogen anti-
scientific "studies," and none mentioning this one.)  

D. E. Brenner, et al., Postmenopausal estrogen replacement therapy and the
risk of Alzheimer's disease: A population-based case-control study," Am. J.
Epidemiol. 140, 262-267, 1994\. "Women tend to have higher age-specific
prevalence and incidence rates of Alzheimer's disease than do men." A.F. Jorm,
The Epidemiology of Alzheimer's disease and related disorders, Chapman and
Hall, London, 1990, and W. A. Rocca, et al., Ann. Neurol. 30, 381-190, 1991.

H. C. Liu, et al., "Performance on a dementia screening test in relation to
demographic variables--study of 5297 community residents in Taiwan," Arch.
Neurol. 51(9), 910-915, 1994\. "Commonly used dementia screening tests may be
unfair to poorly educated individuals, especially women and rural residents."  

**SIGNALS IN THE ABSTRACT**  

When I taught endocrinology, I annoyed my tidy-minded students by urging them
to consider the potential hormone-like action of everything in the body, and
to think of layers of control, ranging from sugar, salt, and carbon dioxide,
through the "official hormones," to complex nervous system actions such as
expectancy, and biorhythms. Certain things that are active in very important
processes deserve special attention as "signals," but they still have to be
understood in context. In this sense, we can think of Ca2+ as a signal
substance, in its many contexts; it is strongly regulated by the cell's energy
charge. Magnesium and sodium antagonize it in certain situations. Linoleic
acid, linolenic acid, arachidonic acid: Their toxicity is potentially
prevented by the Mead acids, and their eicosanoid derivatives, which behave
very differently from the familiar prostaglandins, as far as they have been
compared; can be drastically reduced by dietary changes. Prostaglandins,
prostacyclin, thromboxane: Formation is blocked by aspirin and other
antiinflammatory drugs.  

Adenosine: Sleep inducing protective effect. Adenosine is structurally very
similar to inosine, another natural substance (found in meat, for example)
which is a component of "inosiplex," an antiviral drug (Brown and Gordon, Fed.
Proc. 29, 684, 1970, and Can. J. Microbiol. 18, 1463, 1972) or immunostimulant
which has also been found to have an anti-senility effect (Doty and Gordon,
Fed. Proc. 29). Adenosine is a free radical scavenger, and protects against
calcium and glutamate excitotoxicity. (I. Yokoi, et al., "Adenosines scavenged
hydroxyl radicals and prevented posttraumatic epilepsy," Free Radical Biol.
Med. 19(4), 473-479, 1995; M. P. Abbracchio, et al., "Adenosine A(1) receptors
in rat brain synaptosomes: Transductional mechanisms, efects on glutamate
release, and preservation after metabolic inhibition," Drug Develop. Res.
35(3), 119-129, 1995.) It also appears to protect against the relative
hyperventilation that wastes carbon dioxide, and endotoxin can interfere with
its protective action. Guanosine, in this same group of substances, might have
some similar properties. Thymidine and cytidine, which are pyrimidine-based,
are endogenous analogs of the barbiturates, and like them, they might be
regulators of the cytochrome P450 enzymes. Uridine, in this group, promotes
glycogen synthesis, and is released from bacteria in the presence of
penicillin.  

Iron: Regulator of mRNA stability, heme synthesis; reacts with reductants and
unsaturated oils, to produce free radicals and lipid peroxides; its absorption
is increased by estrogen, hypothyroidism, anemia or lack of oxygen. Glutamate
and aspartate, excitotoxins, and GABA, an inhibitory transmitter.  

These have metabolic links with each other, with ammonia, and with stress and
energy metabolism.  

Estrogen and acetylcholine, excitotoxins; see Savolainen, et al., 1994. The
information on this is overwhelmingly clear, and the publicity to the contrary
is a horrifying example of the corruption of the mass media by the drug
industry.  

Endorphins: Stress induced, laterally specific, involved in estrogen action,
antagonized by naloxone and similar anti-opiate drugs. I have proposed that
the endorphins can cause or sustain some of the symptoms of aging. Naloxone
appears to be a useful treatment for senility. E. Roberts, Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 396, 165, 1982; B. Reisberg, et al., N. Engl. J. Med. 308, 721, 1983.  

Endotoxin: Antimitochondrial action, causes elevation of estrogen. It
synergizes with unsaturated fats, and naloxone opposes some of its toxic
effects.  

Urea, cholesterol: Structural stability of proteins and lipid-protein
complexes.  

Things that act directly on the water structure: I think all of the natural
regulators have an effect on the structure of water, but some unusual
substances seem to act primarily on the water. Noble gases, for example, have
no chemical effects, but they tend to form "cages" of water molecules around
themselves. Camphor, adamantane, and the antiviral drug amantadine, probably
have a similar water-structuring effect, and amantadine, which is widely used
as a therapy in Parkinson's disease, has an anti-excitotoxic action.  

[**Article continued in Part 2 - click
here**](http://raypeat.com/articles/articles/alzheimers2.shtml)

Raymond Peat, Ph.D.

Copyright 1997

**SELECTED REFERENCES**  

S. Rose, "Genuine genetics or conceited convenience?" Trends in Neuro. Sci.
17(3), 105, 1994.  

F. P. Monnet, et al., "Neurosteroids, via sigma receptors, modulate the
[H3]norepinephrine release evoked by N-methyl-D-aspartate in the rat
hippocampus," P.N.A.S. (USA) 92(9), 3773-3778, 1995. "...progesterone may act
as a sigma antagonist."  

J. L. Sanne and K. E. Krueger, "Expression of cytochrome P450 side-chain
cleavage enzyme and 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the rat central
nervous system: A study by polymerase chain reaction and in situ
hybridization," J. of Neurochemistry 65(2), 528-536, 1995.  

V. V. Zakusov and R. U. Ostrovskaya, "Increased resistance of mice to hypoxia
under the influence of tranquilizers of the benzodiazepine series," Byulletan
Eksperimentalnoy Biologii i Meditsiny 71(2), 45-47, 1971. [The protection was
not from the sedative effects, "Rather, the protective effect of these
compounds is attributed to some specific intervention in the metabolism
whereby the sensitivity of the tissues to oxygen insufficiency is reduced.
...the cortical structures of the brain especially appear to derive enhanced
resistance to oxygen deficiency."]  

A. I. Zotin, "Aging and rejuvenation from the standpoint of the thermodynamics
of irreversible processes," Priroda 9, 49-55, 1970. [The process of aging
"...is manifested by a decrease in entropy and...also by a continuous decrease
in the rate of heat production.. The organism exhibits two types of approaches
to a steady state: (i) constitutive movement of the system to the final steady
state and (ii) inducible return of the system to the current steady state
after deviating under the influence of internal or external factors. Oogenesis
represents a constitutive deviation from the steady state; entropy reaches a
level sufficient for the start of development and passage of the living system
into the state of constitutive approach to the final steady state. From the
standpoint of the thermodynamic theory of development, oogenesis reflects the
process of regeneration of the system. In all other stages of life there is
only the aging process accompanied by a decrease in entropy."  

M. M. Tikhomirova, et al., "Mechanisms underlying the resistance of genetic
material of the animal cell to stress treatment," Genetika 30(8), 1092-1104,
1994. "...these studies prove that the formation of a mutation is a multistage
process involving many cell and organism systems...which are affected by
environmental factors.... They can hinder or accelerate the mutational
process, in this way providing both a superadditive effect and adaptive
response. Recent studies deal with a universal system of heat shock proteins,
which is involved in the maintenance of resistance of genetic material and
genetic processes in the cell." Gross, "Reproductive cycle biochemistry,"
Fertility & Sterility 12(3), 245-260, 1961. "The maintenance of an environment
conducive to anaerobic metabolism--which may involve the maintenance of an
adequate supply of the substances that permit anaerobiosis...seems to depend
primarily upon the action of estrogen." "Glycolytic metabolism gradually
increases throughout the proliferative phases of the cycle, reaching a maximum
coincident with the ovulation phase, when estrogen is at a peak. Following
this, glycolysis decreases, the respiratory mechanisms being more active
during the secretory phase. Eschbach and Negelein showed the metabolism of the
infantile mouse uterus to be less anaerobic than that of the adult. If
estrogen is administered, however, there is a 98 per cent increase in
glycolytic mechanisms.""The effect of the progestational steroids may be such
as to interfere with the biochemical pattern required for support of this
anaerobic environment."  

M. A. G. Sissan, et al., "Effects of low-dose oral contraceptive oestrogen and
progestin on lipid peroxidation in rats," J. of International Med. Res. 23(4),
272-278, 1995. "The levels of lipid peroxides, free fatty acids and
glutathione in the liver, and of serum ceruloplasmin increased significantly
with oestrogen treatment. Lipid peroxides (in the liver only), and serum
ceruloplasmin decreased significantly when progestin was administered. The
activities of superoxide dismutase and catalase decreased significantly in the
oestrogen group...but increased in the progestin group."  

A. Jendryczko, et al., "Effects of two low-dose oral contraceptives on
erythrocyte superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase
activities," Zentralbl. Gynakol. (Germany) 115(11), 469-472, 1993. "These data
suggest that low-dose oral contraceptives, by decreasing the activities of
antioxidant enzymes and by enhancing the lipid peroxidation, increase the risk
of cardiovascular disease."  

J. W. Olney, "Excitotoxins in foods," Neurotoxicology 15(3), 535-544, 1994.
"The most frequently encountered food excitotoxin is glutamate which is
commercially added to many foods despite evidence that it can freely penetrate
certain brain regions and rapidly destroy neurons by hyperactivating the NMDA
subtype of glutamate receptor."  

K. Savolainen, et al., "Phosphoinositide second messengers in cholinergic
excitotoxicity," Neurotoxicology 15(3), 493-502, 1994. "Acetylcholine is a
powerful excitotoxic neurotransmitter in the brain. By stimulating calcium-
mobilizing receptors, acetylcholine, through G-proteins, stimulates
phospholipase C and cause the hydrolysis of a membrane phospholipid...."
"Inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate is important in cholinergic neuronal stimulation,
and injury. Cholinergic agonists cause tonic-clonic convulsions which may be
either transient or persistent. Even short-term cholinergic convusions may be
associated with neuronal injury, especially in the basal forebrain and the
hippocampus. Cholinergic-induced convulsions also elevate levels of brain
calcium which precede neuronal injury. Female sex and senescence increase the
sensitivity of rats to cholinergic excitotoxicity." "Furthermore, glutamate
increases neuronal oxidative stress...."  

L. N. Simanovskiy and Zh. A. Chotoyev, "The effect of hypoxia on
glycogenolysis and glycolysis rates in the rat brain," Zhurnal Evolyutsionnoy
Biokhimii i Fiziologii 6(5), 577-579, 1970. "Glycogenolysis and glycolysis in
the whole brain of young and old rats were studied at sea level and under
hypoxic conditions in a low-pressure chamber or at an altitude of 3,200
meters. The rate of carbohydrate metabolism increaased during postnatal
development. In the absence of hypoxia, the rate of accumulation of lactate
from either glycogen or glucose increases with maturation of the animals. The
brain of young rats consumes primarily glycogen, particularly under anaerobic
conditions." "Adaptation of mature rats to intermittent hypoxia is related to
an increase in glycolysis, whereas adaptation of rats to high altitudes
results in an increase in glycogenolysis. The type of carbohydrate metabolism
is thus similar to the metabolism characteristic of the early stages of
ontogenesis."  

Ye. Sadovskiy, "For the prolongation of human life," Sovetskaya Belorussiya
23, page 4, Dec. 1970. "...the accumulation of metals in the organism with age
is one of the most important factors in the development of the aging process."  

Cerebral ischemia (and several other imbalances, relating to steroid
regulation, shock) might be relieved by naloxone: D. S. Baskin and Y.
Hosobuchi, Lancet ii, 272-275, 1981.  

V. Reynolds, et al., "Heart rate variation, age, and behavior in subjects with
senile dementia of Alzheimer type," Chronobiol. Int. 12(1), 37-45, 1995.
"...circadian rhythm of SDAT may be more often unimodal than that of normal
subjects of similar age, and that phase shift of the endogenous, clock-
mediated component of the rhythm (with higher heart rate at night) is to be
expected in a proportion of individuals with SDAT."  

M. Martinez, et al., "Glucose deprivation increases aspartic acid release from
synaptosomes of aged mice," Brain Res. 673(1), 149-152, 1995. "...in the
absence of glucose in the medium of incubation aspartate and glutamate release
was higher in old than in young animals." "...there is an age-dependent
dysfunction in this process linked to energy metabolism disturbance."  

J. M. Pasquini and A. M. Adamo, "Thyroid hormones and the central nervous
system," Dev. Neurosci. 12(1-2), 1-8, 1994. "Among their actions, T3 and T4
have effects on the differentiation of various cell types in the rat brain and
cerebellum as well as on the process of myelination. Recently, several
investigators have shown effects of thyroid hormones on myelin protein gene
expression."  

G. C. Ness and Z. H. Zhao, "Thyroid hormone rapidly induces hepatic LDL
receptor mRNA levels in hypophysectomized rats," Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
315(1), 199-202, 1994.  

E. M. Mutisya, et al., "Cortical cytochrome oxidase activity is reduced in
Alzheimer's disease," J. Neurochem. 63(6), 2170-2184, 1994. "These results
provide further evidence of a cytochrome oxidase defect in Alzheimer's disease
postmortem brain tissue. A deficiency in this key energy-metabolizing enzyme
could lead to a reduction in energy stores and thereby contribute to the
neurodegenerative process."  

G. J. Bu, et al., "Subcellular localization and endocytic function of low
density lipoprotein receptor-related protein in human glioblastoma cells," J.
Biol. Chem. 269(47), 29874-29882, 1994. "Our results thus strongly suggest
several potential roles for LRP in brain protein and lipoprotein metabolism,
as well as control of extracellular protease activity."  

V. Vandenbrouck, et al., "The modulation of apolipoprotein E gene expression
by 3,3'-5-triiodothyronine in HepG(2) cells occurs at transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels," Eur. J. Biochem. 224(2), 463-471, 1994\.
"...thyroid hormone stimulated apoE gene transcription threefold in 24 hours."  

T. Yamada, et al., "Apolipoprotein E mRNA in the brains of patients with
Alzheimer's disease," J. Neurol. Sci. 129(1), 56-61, 1995. In A.D. Apo E "was
decreased in relation to the apoE-epsilon 4 gene dosage." "AD patients who had
long survival times showed high expression of apoE and low expression of GFAP
[glial fibrillary acidic protein]. These results suggest that apoE suppresses
the progression of AD, including gliosis, in the brain."  

G. P. Jarvik, et al., "Genetic influences on age-related change in total
cholesterol, low density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and triglyceride levels:
Longitudinal apolipoprotein E genotype effects," Genet. Epidemiol. 11(4),
375-384, 1994. "Apo E is a component of LDL, is a ligand for the LDL receptor,
and apo E genotype has been consistently associated with variation in mean
levels of total cholesterol and LDL-C...." With aging, total cholesterol and
LDL-C became significantly lower in the "epsilon 4 genotype" group; this is
the group at risk for AD.  

S. Miller and J. M. Wehner, "Cholesterol treatment facilitates spatial
learning performance in DBA/2Ibg mice," Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior
49(1) 257-261, 1994. "Our results suggest that subchronic treatment with the
steroid hormone precursor, cholesterol, enhances spatial learning performance
in DBA mice."  

A. D. Roses, "Apolipoprotein E affects the rate of Alzheimer disease
expression: beta-amyloid burden is a secondary consequence dependent on ApoE
genotype and duration of disease," J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 53(5),
429-437, 1994.  

T. Gunther and V. Hollriegl, "Increased protein oxidation by magnesium
deficiency and vitamin E depletion," Magnesium-Bull. 16(3), 101-103, 1994\.  

F. Oyama, et al., "Apolipoprotein E genotype, Alzheimer's pathologies and
related gene expression in the aged population," Mol. Brain Res. 29(1), 92-98,
1995. "...ApoE4/4 accelerates and ApoE2/3 decelerates the development of the
AD pathologies in the aged brain...."  

M. L. C. Maatschieman, et al., "Microglia in diffuse plaques in hereditary
cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis (Dutch). An immunohistochemical study,"
J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 53(5), 483-491, 1994. "Microglia are intimately
associated with congophilic plaques in Alzheimer's disease...." "Intensely
immunoreactive microglia with enlarged cell bodies and short, thick processes
clustered in congophilic plaques."  

J. Poirier, "Apolipoprotein E in animal models of CNS injury and in
Alzheimer's disease," Trends Neurosci. 17(12), 525-530, 1994. "The coordinated
expression of ApoE and its receptor...[low density lipoprotein (LDL)]
receptor, appears to regulate the transport of cholesterol and phospholipids
during the early and intermediate phases of the reinnervation process." "...a
dysfunction of the lipid-transport system associated with compensatory
sprouting and synaptic remodeling could be central to the AD process."  

P. H. Chan and R. A. Fishman, "Brain edema: Induction in cortical slices by
polyunsaturated fatty acids," Science 201, 358-369, 1978. "This cellular edema
was specific, since neither saturated fatty acids nor a fatty acid containing
a single double bond had such effect." R. Nogues, et al., "Influence of
nutrition, thyroid hormones, and rectal temperature on in-hospital mortality
of elderly patients with acut illness," Am J Clin Nutr 61(3), 597-602, 1995.
"Serum albumin, body weight, and total T3 concentration were higher in
survivors than in nonsurvivors." "Mild hypothermia was a good predictor of
death. Hypoalbuminemia and hypothermia were associated with low T3 and high
rT3 values."  

R. C. Vannucci, et al., "Carbon dioxide protects the perinatal brain from
hypoxic-ischemic damage: An experimental study in the immature rat,"
Pediatrics 95(6), 868-874, 1995.  

H. M. Wisniewski and P. B. Kozlowski, "Evidence for blood-brain barrier
changes in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type (SDAT)", Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 396, 119-129, 1982. "...one would expect that the chronic "flooding" of
the neuronal elements with serum proteins would affect their performance."
"The cause of the increased BBB permeability in SDAT is unknown."  

J. S. Jensen, et al., "Microalbuminuria reflects a generalized transvascular
albumin leakiness in clinically healthy subjects," Clin. Sci. 88(6), 629-633,
1995. "It is suggested that the observed transvascular leakiness, in
addition,may cause increased lipid insudation to the arterial walls."  

C. Nilsson, et al., "The nocturnal increase in human cerebrospinal fluid
production is inhibited by a beta(1)-receptor antagonist," Amer. J.
Physiol.-Regul. Integr. C 36(6), R1445-R1448, 1994.  

D. L. Williams, et al., "Cell surface 'blanket' of apolipoprotein E on rat
adrenocortical cells," J. Lipid Res. 36(4), 745-758, 1995. "...the zona
fasciculata cell is encircled or covered with apoE on all faces of the cell.
...this cell surface 'blanket' of apoE participates in the uptake of
lipoprotein cholesterol by either the endocytic or selective uptake pathways."
C. A. Frye and J. D. Sturgis, "Neurosteroids affect spatial reference,
working, and long-term memory of female rats," Neurobiol. Learn. Memory 64(1),
83-96, 1995. [Female rats take longer to acquire a spatial task during
behavioral estrus.)]  

M. Warner and J. A. Gustafsson, "Cytochrome P450 in the brain: Neuroendocrine
functions," Front Neuroendocrinol 16(3), 224-236, 1995. [Discusses the GABA(A)
receptor active steroids, and the accumulation of pregnenolone in the brain.]  

P. Robel, et al., "Biosynthesis and assay of neurosteroids in rats and mice:
Functional correlates," J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 53(1-6), 355-360, 1995.
[Discusses the effects of pregnenolone and progesterone on aggression and
learning. The animals which learned most easily had the highest levels of
pregnenolone sulfate.] K. W. Lange and P. Riederer, "Glutamatergic drugs in
Parkinson's disease," Life Sci. 55(25-26, 2067-2075, 1994. "...excitatory
amino acids such as glutamate are involved in the pathophysiological cascade
of MPTP...-induced neuronal cell death." "The 1-amino-adamantanes amantadine
and memantine have recently been shown to be non-competitive NMDA antagonists
and are widely used in Europe as antiparkinsonian agents."  

R. A. Wallis, et al., "Glycine-induced CA1 excitotoxicity in the rat
hippocampal slice," Brain Res. 664(1-2) 115-125, 1994. K. Ossawska, "The role
of excitatory amino acids in experimental models of Parkinson's disease," J.
Neural Transm.-Parkinsons 8(1-2_, 39-71, 1994.  

G. S. Roth, et al., "Membrane alterations as causes of impaired signal
transduction in Alzheimer's disease and aging," Trends Neurosci. 18, 203-206,
1995. "Reconstituted lipid membranes from cortical gray matter of AD brain
samples were significantly thinner (that is, had less microviscosity) than
corresponding age-matched controls." "This change in membrane width correlated
with a 30% decrease in the moles of cholesterol:phospholipid." "Addition of
cholesterol restored the membrane width to that of the age-matched control
samples."  

T. Reed, et al., "Lower cognitive performance in normal older adult male twins
carrying the apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele," Arch. Neurol. 51(12),
1189-1182, 1994.  

S.Y. Tan and M. B. Pepys, "Amyloidosis," Histopathology 25(5), 403-414, 1994.
"...abnormal protein fibrils which are derived from different proteins in
different forms of the disease. Asymptomatic amyloid deposition in a variety
of tissues is a universal accompaniment of ageing, and clinical amyloidosis is
not rare. Intracerebral and cerebrovascular beta-protein amyloid deposits are
a hallmark of the pathology of ... Alzheimer's disease...." "Amyloid deposits
are in a state of dynamic turnover and can regress if new fibril formation is
halted." A. V. Sirotkin, "Direct influence of melatonin on steroid,
nonapeptide hormones, and cyclic nucleotide secretion by granulosa cells
isolated from porcine ovaries," J. Pineal Res. 17(3), 112-117, 1994. "It was
found that melatonin is able to inhibit progesterone and stimulate estradiol
secretion." "Some inhibition of vasopressin and cAMP and significant
stimulation of cGMP also resulted from melatonin treatment." R. M. Sapolsky,
"Glucocorticoid toxicity in the hippocampus: Reversal with supplementation
with brain fuels," J. Neurosci. 6, 2240-2245, 1986. R. M. Sapolsky,
"Glucocorticoids, hippocampal damage and the glutaminergic synapse," Prog.
Brain Res. 86, 13-23, 1990. M. Schwartz, et al., "Growth-associated triggering
factors and central nervous system regeneration," p. 47 in Trophic Factors and
the Nervous System, edited by L. A. Horrocks, et al., Raven Press, NY, 1990.
R. W. Ordway, et al., "Direct regulation of ion channels by fatty acids,"
Trends Neurosci. 14, 96-100, 1991.  

H. G. P. Swarts, et al., "Binding of unsaturated fatty acids to Na+,K+-ATPase
leading to inhibition and inactivation," Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1024, 32-40,
1990.

G. Autore, et al., "Essential fatty acid-deficient diet modifies PAF levels in
stomach and duodenum of endotoxin-treated rats," J. Lipid Mediators Cell
Signalling 9, 145-153, 1994. J. Rafael, et al., "The effect of essential fatty
acid deficiency on basal respiration and function of liver mitochondria in
rats," J. Nutr. 114, 255-262, 1984.  

A. M. Weiner, et al., "Nonviral retroposons, genes, pseudogenes, and
transposable elements generated by the reverse flow of genetic information,"
Ann. Rev. Biochem. 55, 631-661, 1986. I. Zs.-Nagy, "Semiconduction of proteins
as an attribute of the living state: The ideas of Albert Szent-Gyorgyi
revisited in light of the recent knowledge regarding oxygen free radicals,"
Exp. Gerontology 30(3-4), 327-335, 1995. "In this assumption, the continuous
radical flux is as important for the maintenance of the living state, as the
voltage power supply is essential for the functioning of the computer."

[**Article continued in Part 2 - click
here**](http://raypeat.com/articles/articles/alzheimers2.shtml)

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

