![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Aspirin, brain, and cancer**  

When a drug such as caffeine or aspirin turns out to have a great variety of
protective effects, it's important to understand what it's doing.

Because aspirin has been abused by pharmaceutical companies that have
competing products to sell, as well as by the original efforts to promote
aspirin itself, people can easily find reasons why they shouldn't take it.

Early in the 20th century, people were told that fevers were very bad, and
that aspirin should be used whenever there is a fever.

In the 1980s, there was a big publicity campaign warning parents that giving
aspirin to a child with the flu could cause the potentially deadly Reye
syndrome. Aspirin sales declined sharply, as sales of acetaminophen (Tylenol,
etc.) increased tremendously. But in Australia, a study of Reye syndrome cases
found that six times as many of them had been using acetaminophen as had used
aspirin. (Orlowski, et al., 1987)

Until the 1950s and 1960s, when new products were being promoted, little was
said about the possibility of stomach ulceration from aspirin. Lately, there
has been more publicity about the damage it can do to the stomach and
intestine, much of it in connection with the sale of the new "COX-2
inhibitors." (These new drugs, rather than protecting the circulatory system
as aspirin does, damage it.) Aspirin rapidly breaks down into acetic acid and
salicylic acid (which is found in many fruits), and salicylic acid is
protective to the stomach and intestine, and other organs. When aspirin was
compared with the other common antiinflammatory drugs, it was found that the
salicylic acid it releases protects against the damage done by another drug.
(Takeuchi, et al, 2001; Ligumsky, et al., 1985.) Repeated use of aspirin
protects the stomach against very strong irritants. The experiments in which
aspirin produces stomach ulcers are designed to produce ulcers, not to
realistically model the way aspirin is used.

Recently, the public has been led to believe that drugs are being designed to
fit certain cellular "receptors." The history of the "COX-2 inhibitors" is
instructive, in a perverse way. The structures of DES and other synthetic
estrogens were said to relate to "the estrogen receptor." Making these
estrogenic molecules more soluble in water made them somewhat anti-estrogenic,
leading to products such as Tamoxifen. But some of the molecules in this group
were found to be antiinflammatory. The structure of Celecoxib and other "COX-2
inhibitors" is remarkably similar to the "designer estrogens." Considering
this, it's a little odd that so few in the U.S. are openly discussing the
possibility that estrogen's function is directly related to inflammation, and
involves the production of many inflammatory mediators, including COX-2. (See
Lerner, et al., 1975; Luo, et al., 2001; Cushman, et al, 2001; Wu, et al.,
2000; Herrington, et al., 2001.)

Soot and smoke contain many chemicals that produce inflammation (Brune, et
al., 1978). In the 1930s, soot was known to be both carcinogenic and
estrogenic, and analysis of its components led to the production of the early
commercial estrogens. Any intelligent person reading the chemical and
biological publications of that time will see how closely associated cancer,
inflammation, and estrogen are.

Soon after vitamin E was discovered, tocopherol was defined as a brain-
protective, pregnancy protective, male fertility protective, antithrombotic,
antiestrogenic agent. But very soon, the estrogen industry made it impossible
to present ideas that explained vitamin E, progesterone, vitamin A, or thyroid
hormone in terms of the protection they provide against estrogenic substances.
Since the polyunsaturated fats caused the same conditions that were caused by
unopposed estrogen, vitamin E came to be known as an "antioxidant," because it
reduced their toxicity. (Vitamin E is now known to suppress COX-2, synergizing
with aspirin and opposing estrogen.)

In 1970, when I was beginning to see the ways in which unopposed estrogen and
accumulated polyunsaturated fats interacted with a vitamin E deficiency during
aging and in infertility, I got some prostaglandins to experiment with, since
they are products of the oxidation of linoleic acid. The prostaglandins are an
interesting link between estrogens and inflammation, in normal physiology as
well as in disease.

I wanted to test their effects on the uterus, especially the sites where the
embryos implant. There was a theory that the electrical charge of the surface
of the uterus was decreased at the implantation sites, to reduce the repulsion
between two negatively charged things. Although there were regions of lower
surface charge along the lining of the uterus, the charge changed as waves of
muscle contraction moved along the uterus, and the prostaglandins affected the
contractions.

To understand the differences between the different types of prostaglandin, I
tested them on my arm, and those with the most hydroxyl groups produced
regions with an increased negative charge. For comparison, I exposed another
spot to sunlight for an hour, and found that there was a similar increase in
the negative charge in that spot. Apparently the prostaglandins were causing
an injury or excitation, a mild inflammation, in the skin cells.

A few years later, aspirin was found to inactivate the enzyme that forms
prostaglandins, by the transfer of the acetyl radical to the enzyme. This
became the orthodox "explanation" for what aspirin does, though it neglected
to explain that salicylic acid (lacking the acetyl radical) had been widely
known in the previous century for its very useful antiinflammatory actions.
The new theory did explain (at least to the satisfaction of editors of medical
magazines) one of aspirin's effects, but it distracted attention from all the
other effects of aspirin and salicylic acid.  
  

Aspirin is an antioxidant that protects against lipid peroxidation, but it
also stimulates mitochondrial respiration. It can inhibit abnormal cell
division, but promote normal cell division. It can facilitate learning, while
preventing excitotoxic nerve injury. It reduces clotting, but it can decrease
excessive menstrual bleeding. These, and many other strangely beneficial
effects of aspirin, strongly suggest that it is acting on very basic
biological processes, in a coherent way.

In explaining aspirin's effects, as in explaining those of estrogen and
progesterone, or polyunsaturated fats and vitamin E, I think we need concepts
of a very broad sort, such as "stability and instability."

The COX (cyclooxygenase) enzymes, that make prostaglandins, are just one
system among many that are activated by stress. Aromatase, that makes
estrogen, enzymes that make histamine, serotonin and nitric oxide, the
cytokines, and the stress-induced hormones of the pituitary and adrenal
glands, are turned on in difficult situations, and have to be turned off when
the threat has been overcome. The production of energy is the basis for
overcoming all threats, and it has to be conserved in readiness for future
needs.

The fetus produces saturated fats such as palmitic acid, and the
monounsaturated fat, oleic acid, which can be turned into the Mead acid, ETrA
(5,8,11-eicosatrienoic acid), and its derivatives, which are antiinflammatory,
and some of which act on the "bliss receptor," or the cannibinoid receptor. In
the adult, tissues such as cartilage, which are protected by their structure
or composition from the entry of exogenous fats, contain the Mead acid despite
the presence of linoleic acid in the blood.

At birth, the baby's mitochondria contain a phospholipid, cardiolipin,
containing palmitic acid, but as the baby eats foods containing
polyunsaturated fatty acids, the palmitic acid in cardiolipin is replaced by
the unsaturated fats. As the cardiolipin becomes more unsaturated, it becomes
less stable, and less able to support the activity of the crucial respiratory
enzyme, cytochrome oxidase.

The respiratory activity of the mitochondria declines as the polyunsaturated
oils replace palmitic acid, and this change corresponds to the life-long
decline of the person's metabolic rate.

In old age, a person's life expectancy strongly depends on the amount of
oxygen that can be used. When the mitochondria can't use oxygen vigorously,
cells must depend on inefficient glycolysis for their energy.

Estrogen activates the glycolytic pathway, while interfering with
mitochondrial respiration. This resembles the aged or stressed metabolism, in
which lactic acid is produced instead of carbon dioxide.

Aspirin activates both glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration, and this
means that it shifts the mitochondria away from the oxidation of fats, toward
the oxidation of glucose, resulting in the increased production of carbon
dioxide. Its action on the glycolytic enzyme, GAPDH, is the opposite of
estrogen's.

The shift away from fat oxidation under the influence of aspirin doesn't lead
to an accumulation of free fatty acids in the circulation, since aspirin
inhibits the release of fatty acids from both phospholipids and triglycerides.
Estrogen has the opposite effects, increasing fat oxidation while increasing
the level of circulating free fatty acids, since it activates lipolysis, as do
several other stress-related hormones.

The polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as linolenic, linoleic, arachidonic,
EPA, and DHA, have many directly toxic, antirespiratory actions, apart from
the production of the prostaglandins or eicosanoids. Just by preventing the
release of these fatty acids, aspirin would have broadly antiinflammatory
effects.

Since the polyunsaturated fats and prostaglandins stimulate the expression of
aromatase, the enzyme that synthesizes estrogen, aspirin decreases the
production of estrogen. So many of aspirin's effects oppose those of estrogen,
it would be tempting to suggest that its "basic action" is the suppression of
estrogen. But I think it's more likely that both estrogen and aspirin are
acting on some basic processes, in approximately opposite ways.

Bioelectrical functions, and the opposition between carbon dioxide and lactic
acid, and the way water is handled in cells, are basic conditions that have a
general or global effect on all of the other more specific biochemical and
physiological processes. Originally, estrogen and progesterone were each
thought to affect only one or a few biochemical events, but it has turned out
that each has a multitude of different biochemical actions, which are
integrated in globally meaningful ways. The salicylic acid molecule is much
smaller and simpler than progesterone, but the range of its beneficial effects
is similar. Because of aspirin's medical antiquity, there has been no
inclination to explain its actions in terms of an "aspirin receptor," as for
valium and the opiates, leaving its biochemistry, except for the inadequate
idea of COX-inhibition, simply unexplained.

If we didn't eat linoleic acid and the other so-called "essential fatty
acids," we would produce large amounts of the "Mead acid," n-9 eicosatrienoic
acid, and its derivatives. This acid in itself is antiinflammatory, and its
derivatives have a variety of antistress actions. The universal toxicity of
the polyunsaturated fats that suppress the Mead fats as they accumulate, and
the remarkable vitality of the animals that live on a diet deficient in the
essential fatty acids, indicate that the Mead fats are important factors in
the stability of our mammalian tissues. This protective lipid system probably
interacts with cellular proteins, modifying the way they bind water and carbon
dioxide and ions, affecting their electrons and their chemical reactivity.

If salicylic acid and the structurally similar antiinflammatories, local
anesthetics, muscle relaxants, expectorants, and antihistamines, act as
surrogates for the absent Mead acid family, and thereby act as defenses
against all the toxic effects of the unstable fats, it would explain the
breadth and apparent coherence of their usefulness. And at the same time it
explains some of the ways that estrogen goes out of control, when it
exacerbates the toxicity of the accumulated unstable fats.

The competition between aspirin and salicylic acid, and other
antiinflammatories, for the active site on the COX enzyme (Rao, et al., 1982),
shows that the structural features of these molecules are in some ways
analogous to those of the polyunsaturated fatty acids. Wherever there are
phospholipids, free fatty acids, fatty acid esters, ethers, etc. (i.e., in
mitochondria, chromosomes, cytoskeleton, collagen networks--essentially
everywhere in and around the cell), the regulatory influence of specific fatty
acids--or their surrogates--will be felt.

Although it would undoubtedly be best to grow up eating foods with relatively
saturated fats, the use of aspirin preventively and therapeutically seems very
reasonable under the present circumstances, in which, for example, clean and
well ripened fruits are not generally available in abundance. Preventing
blindness, degenerative brain diseases, heart and lung diseases, and cancer
with aspirin should get as much support as the crazy public health
recommendations are now getting from government and foundations and the
medical businesses.

When people with cancer ask for my recommendations, they usually think I'm
joking when I tell them to use aspirin, and very often they don't take it, on
the basis of what seems to be a very strong cultural prejudice. Several years
ago, a woman whose doctors said it would be impossible to operate on her
extremely painful "inflammatory breast cancer," had overnight complete relief
of the pain and swelling from taking a few aspirins. The recognized anti-
metastatic effect of aspirin, and its ability to inhibit the development of
new blood vessels that would support the tumor's growth, make it an
appropriate drug to use for pain control, even if it doesn't shrink the tumor.
In studies of many kinds of tumor, though, it does cause regression, or at
least slows tumor growth. And it protects against many of the systemic
consequences of cancer, including wasting (cachexia), immunosuppression, and
strokes.

Opiates are the standard medical prescription for pain control in cancer, but
they are usually prescribed in inadequate quantities, "to prevent addiction."
Biologically, they are the most inappropriate means of pain control, since
they increase the release of histamine, which synergizes with the tumor-
derived factors to suppress immunity and stimulate tumor growth.

It has recently become standard practice in most places to advise a person who
is having a heart attack to immediately chew and swallow an aspirin tablet.

The same better-late-than-never philosophy can be applied to Alzheimer's
disease, Parkinson's disease, and other degenerative nerve diseases. Aspirin
protects against several kinds of toxicity, including excitotoxicity
(glutamate), dopamine toxicity, and oxidative free radical toxicity. Since its
effects on the mitochondria are similar to those of thyroid (T3), using both
of them might improve brain energy production more than just thyroid. (By
activating T3, aspirin can sometimes increase the temperature and pulse rate.)
Magnesium, niacinamide, and other nerve protective substances work together.

In multiple organ failure, which can be caused by profound shock caused by
trauma, infection, or other stress, aspirin is often helpful, but carbon
dioxide and hypertonic glucose and sodium are more important.

Aspirin, like progesterone or vitamin E, can improve fertility, by suppressing
a prostaglandin, and improving uterine circulation.

Although the animal studies that showed stomach damage from aspirin often used
single doses equivalent to 10 or 100 aspirin tablets, the slight irritation
produced by a normal dose of aspirin can be minimized by dissolving the
aspirin in water. The stomach develops a tolerance for aspirin over a period
of a few days, allowing the dose to be increased if necessary. And both
aspirin and salicylic acid can be absorbed through the skin, so rheumatic
problems have been treated by adding the drug to bath water.

The unsaturated (n-6 and n-3) fats that accumulate in our tissues, instead of
being part of the system for reestablishing order and stability, tend to
amplify the instability that is triggered by excitation, by estrogen, or by
external stresses.

I think it's important that we don't allow the drug publicists to obscure the
broad importance of substances such as aspirin, vitamin E, progesterone, and
thyroid. For 60 years, a myth that was created to sell estrogen has harmed
both science and the health of many people.

**REFERENCES**

Free Radic Biol Med 2000 Dec 1;29(11):1135-42. **Synergistic inhibition of
cyclooxygenase-2** **expression by vitamin E and aspirin.** Abate A, Yang G,
Dennery PA, Oberle S, Schroder H

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995 Aug 15;92(17):7926-30. **The mode of action of
aspirin-like drugs: effect on inducible nitric oxide synthase.** Amin AR, Vyas
P, Attur M, Leszczynska-Piziak J, Patel IR, Weissmann G, Abramson SB. "These
studies indicate that the inhibition of iNOS expression and function
represents another mechanism of action for aspirin, if not for all aspirin-
like drugs."

Obstet Gynecol 2001 Mar;97(3):423-7. **Aspirin effects on endometrial cancer
cell growth.** Arango HA, Icely S, Roberts WS, Cavanagh D, Becker JL

J Neurochem 2001 Mar;76(6):1895-904. **Neuroprotective effects of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs by direct scavenging of nitric oxide
radicals.** Asanuma M, Nishibayashi-Asanuma S, Miyazaki I, Kohno M, Ogawa N.

J Neurochem 1998 Oct;71(4):1635-42. **Aspirin and salicylate protect against
MPTP-induced dopamine depletion in mice.** Aubin N, Curet O, Deffois A, Carter
C.

Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1998 Aug;138(3-4):369-74. **The influence of
acetylsalicylic acid on cognitive processing: an event-related potentials
study.** Austermann M, Grotemeyer KH, Evers S, Rodding D, Husstedt IW

Brain Res 1999 Oct 2; 843(1-2): 118-29. **Cyclooxygenase-2 selective
inhibitors aggravate kainic** **acid induced seizure and neuronal cell death
in the hippocampus.** Baik EJ, Kim EJ, Lee SH, Moon C

Cancer Lett 1978 Jun;4(6):333-42. **Inflammatory, tumor initiating and
promoting activities of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and diterpene esters
in mouse skin as compared with their prostaglandin releasing potency in
vitro.** Brune K, Kalin H, Schmidt R, Hecker E.

J Neurooncol 2000;46(3):215-29. **Acetaminophen selectively reduces glioma
cell growth and increases radiosensitivity in culture.** Casper D, Lekhraj R,
Yaparpalvi US, Pidel A, Jaggernauth WA, Werner P, Tribius S, Rowe JD, LaSala
PA "Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly lethal brain cancer. Using
cultures of rodent and human malignant glioma cell lines, we demonstrated that
millimolar concentrations of acetylsalicylate, acetaminophen, and ibuprofen
all significantly reduce cell numbers after several days of culture."

Neurosci Lett 2000 Aug 11;289(3):201-4. **Ibuprofen protects dopaminergic
neurons against glutamate toxicity in vitro.** Casper D, Yaparpalvi U, Rempel
N, Werner P. "We examined the effects of aspirin, acetaminophen, and ibuprofen
on cultured primary rat embryonic neurons from mesencephalon, the area
primarily affected in Parkinson's disease. We evaluated whether these drugs
protect dopaminergic neurons against excitotoxicity. All three NSAIDs
significantly attenuated the decrease in dopamine uptake caused by glutamate,
indicating preservation of neuronal integrity."

Lipids 1996 Aug;31(8):829-37. **Effect of dietary n-9 eicosatrienoic acid on
the fatty acid composition of plasma lipid fractions and tissue
phospholipids.** Cleland LG, Neumann MA, Gibson RA, Hamazaki T, Akimoto K,
James MJ "Dietary enrichment with ETrA warrants further investigation for
possible beneficial effects in models of inflammation and autoimmunity, as
well as in other conditions in which mediators derived from n-6 fatty acids
can affect homeostasis adversely."

Can J Ophthalmol 1981 Jul;16(3):113-8. **Senile cataracts: evidence for
acceleration by diabetes and deceleration by salicylate.** Cotlier E.

Int Ophthalmol 1981 May;3(3):173-7. **Aspirin effect on cataract formation in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis alone or combined with diabetes.** Cotlier
E. "The effects of aspirin on cataract formation may result from 1) lowering
of plasma tryptophan levels and increased excretion of tryptophan metabolites,
2) inhibition of aldose reductase and sorbitol formation in the diabetic lens,
3) inhibition of tryptophan or kynurenine binding to lens protein."

Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2001 Feb;21(2):255-61. **Tamoxifen and cardiac
risk factors** **in healthy women: Suggestion of an anti-inflammatory
effect.** Cushman M, Costantino JP, Tracy RP, Song K, Buckley L, Roberts JD,
Krag DN.

Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001 Dec;33(12):2029-35. **Acetylsalicylic acid inhibits
the pituitary response to exercise-related stress in humans.** Di Luigi L,
Guidetti L, Romanelli F, Baldari C, Conte D.

Ann Med 2000 Dec;32 Suppl 1:21-6 **. Cyclo-oxygenase products and
atherothrombosis.** FitzGerald GA, Austin S, Egan K, Cheng Y, Pratico D

Acta Diabetol Lat 1981;18(1):27-36. **Effects of acetylsalicylic acid on
plasma glucose, free fatty acid, betahydroxybutyrate, glucagon and C-peptide
responses to salbutamol in insulin-dependent diabetic subjects.** Giugliano D,
Passariello N, Torella R, Cerciello T, Varricchio M, Sgambato S.

J Reprod Fertil 1994 Aug;101(3):523-9. **Relationships among GnRH, substance
P, prostaglandins, sex steroids and aromatase activity in the brain of the
male lizard Podarcis sicula sicula during reproduction.** Gobbetti A, Zerani
M, Di Fiore MM, Botte V "Acetylsalicylic acid decreased PGF2 alpha, oestradiol
and aromatase activity, but increased the amount of androgens released."

Natl Med J India 1998 Jan-Feb;11(1):14-7. **Aspirin: a neuroprotective agent
at high doses?** Gomes I.

Radiat Res 1991 Sep;127(3):317-24 **. Effects of some nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory agents on experimental radiation pneumonitis.** Gross NJ,
Holloway NO, Narine KR.

Micron 2001 Apr;32(3):307-15. **Collagen as a model system to investigate the
use of aspirin as an inhibitor of protein glycation and crosslinking.** Hadley
J, Malik N, Meek K.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1981 Aug;218(2):464-9. **Protective effects of aspirin in
endotoxic shock.** Halushka PV, Wise WC, Cook JA.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2000 May; 293(2):417-25. **Cyclooxygenase-2 contributes
to N-methyl-D-aspartate-mediated neuronal cell death in primary cortical cell
culture.** Hewett SJ, Uliasz TF, Vidwans AS, Hewett JA

Med Hypotheses 1999 Apr;52(4):291-2. **Genetic induction and upregulation of
cyclooxygenase (COX) and aromatase (CYP19): an extension of the dietary fat
hypothesis of breast cancer.** Harris RE, Robertson FM, Abou-Issa HM, Farrar
WB, Brueggemeier R A novel model of mammary carcinogenesis is proposed
involving sequential induction and upregulation of cyclooxygenase and
aromatase genes by essential fatty acids prominent in the US diet.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001 Sep; 86(9):4216-22. **Differential effects of E
and droloxifene on C-reactive protein and other markers of inflammation in
healthy postmenopausal women.** Herrington DM, Brosnihan KB, Pusser BE, Seely
EW, Ridker PM, Rifai N, MacLean DB. "E treatment resulted in 65.8% higher
levels of C-reactive protein (P = 0.0002) and 48.1% higher levels of IL-6...."
"These data provide additional evidence of a proinflammatory effect of E that
may have adverse cardiovascular consequences."

J Natl Cancer Inst 1998 Mar 18;90(6):455-60. **Expression of cyclooxygenase-1
and cyclooxygenase-2 in human breast cancer.** Hwang D, Scollard D, Byrne J,
Levine E "Our results suggest that overexpression of COX may not be unique to
colon cancer and may be a feature common to other epithelial tumors."

Ginekol Pol 1999 Mar;70(3):126-34. **[Evaluation of the effectiveness of a
low-dose aspirin in the treatment of intrauterine growth retardation
(IUGR)].** Kalinka J, Sieroszewski P, Hanke W, Laudanski T, Suzin J

J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1995 Feb;25(2):273-81. **Inhibitory effects of aspirin
on coronary hyperreactivity to autacoids after arterial balloon injury in
miniature pigs.** Kuga T, Ohara Y, Shimokawa H, Ibayashi S, Tomoike H,
Takeshita A. "Coronary vasoconstriction induced by histamine and serotonin
were examined angiographically before, 1 h, 1 week, and 1 month after balloon
injury in 29 hypercholesterolemic miniature pigs." "Hyperconstriction induced
by the autacoids 1 h after injury were significantly less in groups B and C
than in group A (p < 0.01). Hyperconstriction induced by autacoids 1 week
after injury were significantly less in group B than in group A (p < 0.01) and
were significantly less in group C than in group A (p < 0.01) or group B (p <
0.05)."

Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1975 Feb;148(2):329-32. **Correlation of anti-
inflammatory activity with inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis activity of
nonsteroidal anti-estrogens and estrogens** (38532). Lerner EJ, Carminati P,
Schiatti P.

Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1985 Feb;178(2):250-3. **Salicylic acid blocks
indomethacin-induced cyclooxygenase inhibition and lesion formation in rat
gastric mucosa.** Ligumsky M, Guth PH, Elashoff J, Kauffman GL Jr, Hansen D,
Paulsen G. "Salicylic acid has been shown to decrease gastric mucosal lesions
induced by indomethacin in the rat."

Z Naturforsch [C] 2001 May-Jun; 56(5-6):455-63. **Constant expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 gene in prostate and the lower urinary tract of estrogen-
treated** **male rats.** Luo C, Strauss L, Ristimaki A, Streng T, Santti R.

Neuropharmacology 2000 Apr 27;39(7):1309-18. **Mechanisms of the
neuroprotective effect of aspirin after oxygen and glucose deprivation in rat
forebrain slices.** Moro MA, De Alba J, Cardenas A, De Cristobal J, Leza JC,
Lizasoain I, Diaz-Guerra MJ, Bosca L, Lorenzo P "Apart from its preventive
actions against stroke due to its antithrombotic properties, recent data in
the literature suggest that high concentrations of ASA also exert direct
neuroprotective effects." "We have found that ASA inhibits neuronal damage at
concentrations lower than those previously reported (0.1-0.5 mM), and that
these effects correlate with the inhibition of excitatory amino acid release,
of NF-kappaB translocation to the nucleus and iNOS expression caused by ASA."
"Our results also show that the effects of ASA are independent of COX
inhibition. Taken together, our present findings show that ASA is
neuroprotective in an in vitro model of brain ischaemia at doses close to
those recommended for its antithrombotic effects."

Pediatrics 1987 Nov;80(5):638-42. **A catch in the Reye.** Orlowski JP, Gillis
J, Kilham HA.

Prostaglandins Leukot Med 1982 Jul;9(1):109-15. **Effect of acetaminophen and
salicylate on aspirin-induced inhibition of human platelet cyclo-oxygenase.**
Rao GH, Reddy KR, White JG. "Recent studies have shown that salicylic acid, a
metabolite of aspirin, effectively competes for the same site on the platelet
cyclo-oxygenase enzyme."

Stroke 1997 Oct;28(10):2006-11. **Acetylsalicylic acid increases tolerance
against hypoxic and chemical hypoxia.** Riepe MW, Kasischke K, Raupach A.

Cancer Res 1998 Dec 1;58(23):5354-60. **Prevention of NNK-induced lung
tumorigenesis in A/J mice by acetylsalicylic acid and NS-398.** Rioux N,
Castonguay A

J Endocrinol 1989 Jun;121(3):513-9. **Indomethacin inhibits the effects of
oestrogen** **in the anterior pituitary gland of the rat.** Rosental DG,
Machiavelli GA, Chernavsky AC, Speziale NS, Burdman JA.

Int J Cancer 2001 Aug 15;93(4):497-506. **Cyclooxygenase inhibitors retard
murine mammary tumor progression by reducing tumor cell migration,
invasiveness and angiogenesis.** Rozic JG, Chakraborty C, Lala PK.

Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol 1998 Sep;101(3):259-68. **Protective ability
of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) to scavenge radiation induced free radicals
in J774A.1 macrophage cells.** Saini T, Bagchi M, Bagchi D, Jaeger S, Hosoyama
S, Stohs SJ.

Mol Cell Biochem 1999 Sep;199(1-2):93-102. **Antioxidant properties of
aspirin: characterization of the ability of aspirin to inhibit silica-induced
lipid peroxidation, DNA damage, NF-kappaB activation, and TNF-alpha
production.** Shi X, Ding M, Dong Z, Chen F, Ye J, Wang S, Leonard SS,
Castranova V, Vallyathan V

J Physiol Paris 2001 Jan-Dec;95(1-6):51-7. **Protection by aspirin of
indomethacin-induced small intestinal damage in rats: mediation by salicylic
acid.** Takeuchi K, Hase S, Mizoguchi H, Komoike Y, Tanaka A. "Most of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) except aspirin (ASA) produce
intestinal damage in rats." "ASA did not provoke any damage, despite
inhibiting (prostaglandin) PG production, and prevented the occurrence of
intestinal lesions induced by indomethacin, in a dose-related manner."

FASEB J 2001 Oct;15(12):2057-72. **Cyclooxygenase-independent actions of
cyclooxygenase** **inhibitors.** Tegeder I, Pfeilschifter J, Geisslinger G.

J Indian Med Assoc 1997 Feb;95(2):43-4, 47. **Role of low dose aspirin in
prevention of pregnancy induced hypertension.** Tewari S, Kaushish R, Sharma
S, Gulati N

J Chromatogr B Biomed Appl 1995 Jul 21;669(2):404-7. **Aspirin inhibits
collagen-induced platelet serotonin release, as measured by microbore high-
performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection.** Tsai TH,
Tsai WJ, Chen CF.

Clin Exp Immunol 1991 Nov;86(2):315-21. **Piroxicam, indomethacin** **and
aspirin action on a murine fibrosarcoma.** Effects on tumour-associated and
peritoneal macrophages. Valdez JC, Perdigon G. "We also studied the effect on
tumour development of three inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis:
indomethacin, piroxicam and aspirin. Intraperitoneal administration of these
drugs during 8 d was followed by the regression of palpable tumours.
Indomethacin (90 mg/d) induced 45% regression, while with piroxicam (two 400
mg/d doses and six 200 mg/d doses) and aspirin (1 mg/d) 32% and 30%
regressions, respectively, were observed. The growth rate of nonregressing
tumours, which had reached different volumes by the end of the treatment, was
delayed to a similar extent by the three anti-inflammatory non-steroidal drugs
(NSAID)."

Int J Radiat Biol 1995 May;67(5):587-96. **Amelioration of radiation
nephropathy by acetylsalicylic acid.** Verheij M, Stewart FA, Oussoren Y,
Weening JJ, Dewit L.

Semin Perinatol 1986 Oct;10(4):334-55. **The role of arachidonic acid
metabolites in preeclampsia.** Walsh SW, Parisi VM.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 Apr 27;96(9):5292-7. **Suppression of inducible
cyclooxygenase 2 gene transcription by aspirin and sodium salicylate.** Xu XM,
Sansores-Garcia L, Chen XM, Matijevic-Aleksic N, Du M, Wu KK. "Aspirin and
sodium salicylate at therapeutic concentrations equipotently blocked COX-2
mRNA and protein levels induced by interleukin-1beta and phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate."

Hum Reprod 1994 Oct;9(10):1954-7. **The benefits of low-dose aspirin therapy
in women with impaired uterine perfusion during assisted conception.** Wada I,
Hsu CC, Williams G, Macnamee MC, Brinsden PR. "Higher pregnancy rates (47
versus 17%) were achieved in those taking aspirin from day 1 of HRT." "The
addition of low-dose aspirin to a standard HRT protocol in women with impaired
uterine perfusion is associated with improved blood flow and satisfactory
pregnancy rates."

J Ethnopharmacol 1991 Sep;34(2-3):215-9. **Radiation-protective and platelet
aggregation inhibitory effects of five traditional Chinese drugs and
acetylsalicylic acid following high-dose gamma-irradiation.** Wang HF, Li XD,
Chen YM, Yuan LB, Foye WO.

Fertil Steril 1997 Nov;68(5):927-30. **Low-dose aspirin for oocyte donation
recipients with a thin endometrium: prospective, randomized study.** Weckstein
LN, Jacobson A, Galen D, Hampton K, Hammel J. "Low-dose aspirin therapy
improves implantation rates in oocyte donation recipients with a thin
endometrium."

Dermatologica 1978;156(2):89-96. **Effect of topical salicylic acid on animal
epidermopoiesis.** Weirich EG, Longauer JK, Kirkwood AH. In contrast to its
antihyperplastic effect on pathological proliferation of the epidermis,
salicylic acid promotes epidermopoiesis in the normal guinea pig skin. After
the application of 1% w/w salicylic acid in acetone-ethanol for 4 weeks, the
thickness of the surface epithelium was increased by 40% and that of the deep
epithelium by 19%. The mitotic index rose by 17%.

Arch Exp Veterinarmed 1981;35(3):465-70. **[Control of implantation in rats
and sows by peroral administration of prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors. 2.
Effects of prostaglandin F2 alpha, progesterone/estrone, and acetylsalicylic
acid on implantation and various biochemical parameters of amniotic fluid in
the rat]** Wollenhaupt K, Steger H. "The highest number of normally developed
(97 per cent) and the lowest number of degenerated foetuses (three per cent)
were recorded following acetylsalicylic acid treatment, as compared to the
control group (91 and nine per cent)."

Biomed Pharmacother 1999 Aug;53(7):315-8. **Aspirin induced apoptosis in
gastric cancer cells.** Wong BC, Zhu GH, Lam SK

Scand J Immunol 2000 Oct;52(4):393-400. **Tamoxifen decreases renal
inflammation and alleviates disease severity in autoimmune NZB/W F1 mice.** Wu
WM, Lin BF, Su YC, Suen JL, Chiang BL. "It has been documented that sex
hormone may play a role in the pathogenesis of murine lupus."

Science 2001 Aug 31;293(5535):1673-7. **Reversal of obesity- and diet-induced
insulin resistance with salicylates or targeted disruption of Ikkbeta.** Yuan
M, Konstantopoulos N, Lee J, Hansen L, Li ZW, Karin M, Shoelson SE.  

* * *

**_Since the 1970s, aspirin has been thought of as an inhibitor of
prostaglandin synthesis, but that is only part of its effect. Sometimes its
effect is the opposite of the effects of other prostaglandin inhibitors._**

**_It protects against the harmful effects of estrogen, prolactin, serotonin,
cortisol, histamine, and radiation (u.v., x-rays, gamma rays)._**

**_It prevents cancer, and can cause its regression. It inhibits vascular
proliferation. It inhibits interleukin 6 (and other inflammatory cytokines),
which is a factor in heart disease and breast and liver cancer._**

**_It protects the brain, and can improve learning. It's an antioxidant,
prevents cataracts, and protects against glycation in diabetes._**

**_It prevents premature birth and prevents birth defects caused by diabetes,
preeclampsia, and exposure to alcohol. It prevents recurrence of neural tube
defects and protects against many of the gestational problems associated with
lupus._**

**_Although aspirin protects against uncontrolled cell proliferation, as in
cancer and psoriasis, salicylic acid increases normal cell division in the
skin._**

**_Aspirin protects against many forms of shock and stess, and corrects
imbalances in the nervous system._**

**_It protects against several kinds of toxins involved in brain
degeneration._**

**_"Aspirin elevated ATP levels not only in intact cortical neurons but also
in isolated brain mitochondria, an effect concomitant with an increase in
NADH-dependent respiration by brain submitochondrial particles."_**

**_De Cristobal, et al., 2002_**

**_"The pharmacological action of salicylate cannot be explained by its
inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) activity." ". . . salicylate exerts its
antiinflammatory action in part by suppressing COX-2 induction. . . ." XM Xu,
et al., 1999_**  

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

