![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Academic authoritarians, language, metaphor, animals, and science**  

# **Academic authoritarians, language, metaphor, animals, & science**

A few years ago a group of researchers in Scotland studying learning in apes
did some experiments (involving opening boxes to get a piece of candy inside)
that showed that chimpanzees learn in a variety of flexibly adaptive ways,
and that 3 year old children being presented with a similar task most often
did it in ways that appear to be less intelligent than the apes. They suggest
that the difference in performance of chimpanzees and children may be due to
**** a greater susceptibility of children to cultural conventions. (Horner
and Whiten, 2005; Whiten, et al., 2004).

In my newsletter on puberty, I described some of the effects of foods and
hormones on intelligence. Here, I want to consider the effects of culture on
the way people learn and think. Culture, it seems, starts to make us stupid
long before the metabolic problems appear.

For many years I described culture as the perceived limits of possibility, but
people usually prefer to think of it as the learned rules of conduct in a
society. In the late 1950s I was talking with a psychologist about the nature
of mental maps, and I said that I found my way around campus by reference to
mental pictures of the locations of things, and he said that his method was to
follow a series of rules, go out the front door and turn left, turn left at
the first corner, walk three blocks and turn right, ....up the stairs, turn
right, fourth office on the left. He had been studying mental processes for
about 40 years, so his claim made an impression on me.

I thought this style of thinking might have something to do with the growing
technological preference for digital, rather than analog, devices. The
complexity and continuity of the real world is made to seem more precise and
concrete by turning it into rules and numbers.

Around the same time, I found that some people dream in vivid images, while
others describe dreams as listening to someone tell a story.

Several years later, a graduate student of language philosophy from MIT told
me that I was just confused if I believed that I had mental images that I
could use in thinking. His attitude was that language, in its forms and in the
ways it could convey meaning, was governed by rules. He was part of an effort
to define consciousness in terms of rules that could be manipulated formally.
This was just a new variation on the doctrine of an ideal language that has
concerned many philosophers since Leibniz, but now its main use is to convince
people that cultural conventions and authority are rooted in the nature of our
minds, rather than in particular things that people experience and the ways in
which they are treated.

George Orwell, whose novels showed some of the ways language is used to
control people, believed that language should be like a clear window between
minds, but knew that it was habitually used to distort, mislead, and control.
Scientific and medical practices often follow the authority of culture and
indoctrination, instead of intelligently confronting the meaning of the
evidence, the way chimpanzees are able to do.

Not so many years ago, people believed that traits were determined by genes,
and that the development of an organism was the result of--was caused by--the
sequential expression of genes in the nucleus of the fertilized egg. When B.F.
Skinner in the 1970s said a gestating baby isn't influenced by what happens
to its mother, he was expressing a deeply rooted bio-medical dogma.
Physicians insisted that a baby couldn't be harmed by its mother's
malnutrition, as long as she lived to give birth. People could be quite
vicious when their dogma was challenged, but their actions were systematically
vicious when they weren't challenged.

An ovum doesn't just grow from an oocyte according to instructions in its
genes, it is constructed, with surrounding nurse cells adding substances to
its cytoplasm. Analogously, the fertilized egg doesn't just grow into a human
being, it is constructed, by interactions with the mother's physiology. At
birth, the environment continues to influence the ways in which cells develop
and interact with each other.

Even during adulthood, the ways in which our cells--in the brain, immune
system, and other organs--develop and interact are shaped by the environment.
When Skinner was writing, many biologists still believed that each synapse of
a nerve was directed by a gene, and couldn't be influenced by experience.

Our brain grows into our culture, and the culture lives in our nervous system.
If a person grows up without hearing people speak, he will have grown a
special kind of brain, making it difficult to learn to speak. (Genie, wolf
boy, Kaspar Hauser, for example.)

When we ask a question and find an answer, we are changed. Thinking with
learning is a developmental process. But many people learn at an early age not
to question. This changes the nature of subsequent learning and brain
development.

In the 1960s, many textbooks were published that claimed to use scientific
language theory to improve the instruction of English, from grade school level
to college level. They didn't work, and at the time they were being published
they appeared fraudulent to people who didn't subscribe to the incipient cults
of Generative Grammar and Artificial Intelligence that later developed
into Cognitive Science.

At the time that Artificial Intelligence was coming to the attention of
investors and academicians, Neodarwinism had already cleansed the university
biology departments of its opponents who advocated more holistic views, and
the idea of a brain that was hard-wired according to genetic instructions
had entered both neurology and psychology. The field concept was disappearing
from developmental biology, as Gestalt psychology was disappearing from the
universities and journals.

In the humanities and social sciences, a fad appeared in the 1960s, in which a
theory of grammar advocated by Noam Chomsky of MIT was said to explain human
thinking and behavior, and specialists in anthropology, psychology,
literature, rhetoric, sociology, and other academic fields, claimed that it
informed their work in an essential way. The rapid spread of a doctrine for
which there was essentially no evidence suggests that it was filling a need
for many people in our culture. This doctrine was filling some of the gaps
left by the failure of genetic determinism that was starting to be recognized.
It gave new support to the doctrine of inborn capacities and limitations, in
which formulaic indoctrination can be justified by the brain's natural
structure.

Chomsky was committed to an idealistic, rationalist doctrine of innate
ideas, and to argue for that doctrine, which held that there are transcendent
forms (or deep structures) that control mind, he disposed of the opposing
empiricist approach to mind by claiming that children simply learn language
so rapidly that it would be impossible to explain on the basis of learning
from experience. Separating vocabulary from grammar, he acknowledged that each
language is different, and can be learned as easily by the children of
immigrants of different ethnicity as by children whose ancestors spoke it, but
that all humans have a genetically encoded universal grammar, a language
organ. It is this inborn grammar that allows children to learn what he said
would be inconceivable to learn so quickly from experience.

The abstract, computational nature of the inborn functions of the language
organ would make a nice program for a translating machine, and the absence of
such a useful program, after more than 50 years of trying to devise one,
argues against the possibility of such a thing.

Since Plato's time, some people have believed that, behind the changing
irregularities of real languages, there is a timeless, context-free language.
In the late 1950s, when I was studying language and the ideal languages of
the philosophers, I realized that George Santayana was right when he pointed
out that each time an artificial language is used by real people in real
situations, it is altered by the experience that accrues to each component,
from the context in which it is used. If real language were the model for
mathematics, then the values of numbers would change a little with every
calculation.

Adults are usually slower than children at learning a new language, but they
can make the process much quicker by memorizing paradigms. With those models,
they can begin speaking intelligible sentences when they know only a few
words. These basics of grammar are often outlined in just a few pages, but
listing irregularities and exceptions can become very detailed and complex.
The grammar that children use isn't as subtle as the grammar some adults use,
and college freshmen are seldom masters of the grammar of their native
language.

There have been various studies that have investigated the number of words
understood by children at different ages.

The Virginia Polytechnic Institute website says that

By age 4 a person probably knows 5,600 words

By age 5 a person probably knows 9,600 words

By age 6 a person probably knows 14,700 words

By age 7 a person probably knows 21,200 words

By age 8 a person probably knows 26,300 words

By age 9 a person probably knows 29,300 words

By age 10 a person probably knows 34,300 words

By age 20 a college sophomore probably knows 120,000 words

A dictionary with 14,000 words is a substantial book. The grammar used by a 6
year old person isn't very complex, because at that age a person isn't likely
to know all of the subtleties of their language. There is no reason to assume
that a mind that can learn thousands of words and concepts in a year can't
learn the grammatical patterns of a language--a much smaller number of
patterns and relationships--in a few years.

Idioms and clichés are clusters of words that are frequently used together in
the same pattern to express a stereotyped meaning. There are thousands of them
in English, and some of them have existed for centuries, while others are
regional and generational. It is possible to speak or write almost completely
in clichés, and they are such an important part of language that their
acquisition along with the basic vocabulary deserves more attention than
linguists have given it. A mind that can learn so many clichés can certainly
learn the relatively few stereotypical rules of phrasing that make up the
grammar of a language. In fact, a grammar in some ways resembles a complex
cliché.

Recognition of patterns, first of things that are present, then of meaningful
sequences, is what we call awareness or consciousness. There is biological
evidence, from the level of single cells through many types of organism, both
plant and animal, that pattern recognition is a basic biological function. An
organism that isn't oriented in space and time isn't an adapted, adapting,
organism. Environments change, and the organization of life necessarily has
some flexibility.

A traveling bird or dog can see a pattern once, and later, going in the
opposite direction, can recognize and find specific places and objects. An ant
or bee can see a pattern once, and communicate it to others.

If dogs and birds lived in colonies or cities, as bees and ants do, and
carried food home from remote locations, they might have a need to communicate
their knowledge. The fact that birds and dogs use their vocal organs and
brains to communicate in ways that people have seldom cared to study doesn't
imply that their brains differ radically from human brains in lacking a
language organ.

People whose ideology says that animals use instinct rather than
intelligence, and that they lack the language instinct, refuse to perceive
animals that are demonstrating their ability to generalize or to understand
language.

Organisms have genes, so a person could say that pattern recognition is
genetically determined, but it would be a foolish and empty thing to say.
(Nevertheless, people do say it.) The people who believe that there are genes
for grammar believe that these mind-controlling genes give us the ability to
generalize, and therefore say that animals aren't able to generalize, though
their instinctive behaviors might sometimes seem to involve generalization.

In language, patterns are represented symbolically by patterned sounds, and
some of those symbolically represented patterns are made up of other patterns.
Different languages have different ways of representing different kinds of
patterns.

Things are recognizable when they are far or near, moving or still, bright
or dark, or upside down, because the recognition of a pattern is an
integration involving both spatial and temporal components. The recognition of
an object involves both generalization and concreteness.

Things that are very complex are likely to take longer to recognize, but the
nature of any pattern is that it is a complex of parts and properties.

A name for a thing is a name for a pattern, a set of relationships.

The method of naming or identifying a relationship can make use of any way of
patterning sound that can be recognized as making distinctions. Concepts and
grammar aren't separable things, semantics and syntax are just aspects of
a particular language's way of handling meaning.

As a child interacts with more and more things, and learns things about them,
the patterns of familiar things are compared to the patterns of new things,
and differences and similarities are noticed and used to understand
relationships. The comparison of patterns is a process of making analogies, or
metaphors. Similarities perceived become generalizations, and distinctions
allow things to be grouped into categories.

When things are explored analogically, the exploration may first identify
objects, and then explore the factors that make up the larger pattern that was
first identified, in a kind of analysis, but this analysis is a sort of
expansion inward, in which the discovered complexity has the extra meaning of
the larger context in which it is found.

When something new is noticed, it excites the brain, and causes attention to
be focused, in the orienting reflex. The various senses participate in
examining the thing, in a physiological way of asking a question. Perception
of new patterns and the formation of generalizations expands the ways in which
questions are asked. When words are available, questions may be verbalized.
The way in which questions are answered verbally may be useful, but it often
diverts the questioning process, and provides rules and arbitrary
generalizations that may take the place of the normal analogical processes of
intelligence. The vocabulary of patterns no longer expands spontaneously, but
tends to come to rest in a system of accepted opinions.

A few patterns, formulated in language, are substituted for the processes of
exploration through metaphorical thinking. In the first stages of learning,
the process is expansive and metaphorical. If a question is closed by an
answer in the form of a rule that must be followed, subsequent learning can
only be analytical and deductive.

Learning of this sort is always a system of closed compartments, though one
system might occasionally be exchanged for another, in a conversion
experience.

The exploratory analogical mind is able to form broad generalizations and to
make deductions from those, but the validity of the generalization is always
in a process of being tested. Both the deduction and the generalization are
constantly open to revision in accordance with the available evidence.

If there were infallible authorities who set down general rules, language and
knowledge could be idealized and made mathematically precise. In their
absence, intelligence is necessary, but the authorities who would be
infallible devise ways to confine and control intelligence, so that, with the
mastery of a language, the growth of intelligence usually stops.

In the 1940s and '50s, W.J.J. Gordon organized a group called Synectics, to
investigate the creative process, and to devise ways to teach people to solve
problems effectively. It involved several methods for helping people to think
analogically and metaphorically, and to avoid stereotyped interpretations. It
was a way of teaching people to recover the style of thinking of young
children, or of chimps, or other intelligent animals.

When the acquisition of language is burdened by the acceptance of clichés,
producing the conventionalism mentioned by Horner and Whiten, with the
substitution of deductive reasoning for metaphorical-analogical thinking, the
natural pleasures of mental exploration and creation are lost, and a new kind
of personality and character has come into existence.

Bob Altemeyer spent his career studying the authoritarian personality, and has
identified its defining traits as conventionalism, submission to authority,
and aggression, as sanctioned by the authorities. His last book, _The
Authoritarians_ (2006) is available on the internet.

Altemeyer found that people who scored high on his scale of authoritarianism
tended to have faulty reasoning, with compartmentalized thinking, making it
possible to hold contradictory beliefs, and to be dogmatic, hypocritical, and
hostile.

Since he is looking at a spectrum, focusing on differences, I think he is
likely to have underestimated the degree to which these traits exist in the
mainstream, and in groups such as scientists, that have a professional
commitment to clear reasoning and objectivity. With careful training, and in a
culture that doesn't value creative metaphorical thinking, authoritarianism
might be a preferred trait.

Konrad Lorenz (who with Niko Tinbergen got the Nobel Prize in 1973) believed
that specific innate structures explained animal communication, and that
natural selection had created those structures. Chomsky, who said that our
genes create an innate Language Acquisition Device, distanced himself
slightly from Lorenz's view by saying that it wasn't certain that natural
selection was responsible for it. However, despite slightly different names
for the hypothetical innate devices, their views were extremely similar.

Both Lorenz and Chomsky, and their doctrine of innate rule-based
consciousness, have been popular and influential among university professors.
When Lorenz wrote a book on degeneration, which was little more than a revised
version of the articles he had written for the Nazi party's Office for Race
Policy in the late 1930s and early 1940s, advocating the extermination of
racial mongrels such as jews and gypsies, most biologists in the US praised
it. Lorenz identified National Socialism with evolution as an agent of racial
purification. His lifelong beliefs and activities--the loyalty to a strong
leader, advocating the killing of the weak--identified Lorenz as an extreme
authoritarian.

When a famous professor went on a lecture tour popularizing and affirming the
scientific truth and importance of those publications, and asserting that all
human actions and knowledge, language, work, art, and belief, are specified
and determined by genes, he and his audience (which, at the University of
Oregon, included members of the National Academy of Sciences and Jewish
professors who had been refugees from Nazism, who listened approvingly) were
outraged when a student mentioned the Nazi origin and intention of the
original publications.

They said you can't say that a man's work has anything to do with his life
and political beliefs, but in fact the lecturer had just finished saying that
everything a person does is integral to that person's deepest nature, just as
Lorenz said that a goose with a pot belly and odd beak, or a person with non-
nordic physical features and behavior and cultural preferences--should be
eliminated for the improvement of the species. Not a single professor in the
audience questioned the science that had justified Hitler's racial policies,
and some of them showed great hostility toward the critic.

In the 1960s, a professor compared graduate students' scores on the Miller
Analogies Test, which is a widely used test of analogical thinking ability, to
their academic grades. She found that the students who scored close to the
average on the test had the highest grades and the greatest academic success,
and those who deviated the most from the average on that test, in either
direction, had the worst academic grades. If the ability to think analogically
is inversely associated with authoritarianism, then her results would indicate
that graduate schools select for authoritarianism. (If not, then they simply
select for mediocrity.)

Although Bob Altemeyer's scale mainly identified right-wing, conservative
authoritarians, he indicated that there could be left-wing authoritarians,
too. Noam Chomsky is identified with left-wing political views, but his views
of genetic determinism and a nativist view of language learning, and his
anti-empiricist identification of himself as a philosophical Rationalist, have
a great correspondence to the authoritarian character. The nativist rule-
based nature of Cognitive Science is just the modern form of an
authoritarian tradition that has been influential since Plato's time.

The first thing a person is likely to notice when looking at Chomsky's work in
linguistics is that he offers no evidence to support his extreme assertions.
In fact, the main role evidence plays in his basic scheme is negative, that
is, his doctrine of Poverty of the Stimulus asserts that children aren't
exposed to enough examples of language for them to be able to learn grammar--
therefore, grammar must be inborn.

I think Chomsky discovered long ago that the people around him were
sufficiently authoritarian to accept assertions without evidence if they were
presented in a form that looked complexly technical. Several people have
published their correspondence with him, showing him to be authoritarian and
arrogant, even rude and insulting, if the person questioned his handling of
evidence, or the lack of evidence.

For example, people have argued with him about the JFK assassination, US
policy in the Vietnam war, the HIV-AIDS issue, and the 9/11 investigation. In
each case, he accepts the official position of the government, and insults
those who question, for example, the adequacy of the Warren Commission report,
or who believe that the pharmaceutical industry would manipulate the evidence
regarding AIDS, or who doubt the conclusions of the 9/11 Commission
investigation.

He says that investigation of such issues is diverting people from serious
issues, as if those aren't serious issues. And even if it's true that the
government was involved in the 9/11 terrorism, who cares? I mean, it doesn't
have any significance. I mean it's a little bit like the huge amount of energy
that's put out on trying to figure out who killed John F. Kennedy. I mean, who
knows, and who cares plenty of people get killed all the time. Why does it
matter that one of them happens to be John F. Kennedy?"

"If there was some reason to believe that there was a high level conspiracy"
in the JFK assassination, "it might be interesting, but the evidence against
that is just overwhelming." "And after that it's just a matter of, uh, if it's
a jealous husband or the mafia or someone else, what difference does it make?"
"It's just taking energy away from serious issues onto ones that don't matter.
And I think the same is true here," regarding the events of 9/11. These
reactions seem especially significant, considering his reputation as America's
leading dissenter.

The speed with which Chomskyism spread through universities in the US in the
1960s convinced me that I was right in viewing the instruction of the
humanities and social sciences as indoctrination, rather than objective
treatment of knowledge. The reception of the authoritarian ideas of Lorenz and
his apologists in biology departments offered me a new perspective on the
motivations involved in the uniformity of the orthodox views of biology and
medicine.

In being introduced into a profession, any lingering tendency toward
analogical-metaphoric thinking is suppressed. I have known perceptive,
imaginative people who, after a year or two in medical school, had become
rigid rule-followers.

One of the perennial questions people have asked when they learn of the
suppression of a therapy, is if the doctors are doing it to defend the
profitable old methods, how can they refuse to use the better method even for
themselves and their own family? The answer seems to be that their minds have
been radically affected by their vocational training.

For many years, cancer and inflammation have been known to be closely
associated, even to be aspects of a single process. This was obvious to
analog minded people, but seemed utterly improbable to the essentialist
mentality, because of the indoctrination that inflammation is a good thing,
that couldn't coexist with a bad thing like cancer.

The philosophy of language might seem remote from politics and practical
problems, but Kings and advertisers have understood that words and ideas are
powerfully influential in maintaining relationships of power.

Theories of mind and language that justify arbitrary power, power that can't
justify itself in terms of evidence, are more dangerous than merely mistaken
scientific theories, because any theory that bases its arguments on evidence
is capable of being disproved.

In the middle ages, the Divine Right of Kings was derived from certain kinds
of theological reasoning. It has been replaced by newer ideologies, based on
deductions from beliefs about the nature of mind and matter, words and genes,
Computational Grammar, or numbers and quantized energy, but behind the
ideology is the reality of the authoritarian personality.

I think if we understand more about the nature of language and its acquisition
we will have a clearer picture of what is happening in our cultures,
especially in the culture of science.  

REFERENCES

New Yorker, **** April 16, 2007 **, The Interpreter: Has a remote Amazonian
tribe upended our understanding of language?** by John Colapinto. Dan
Everett believes that Pirahã undermines Noam Chomsky's idea of a universal
grammar.

Language & Communication Volume 23, Issue 1, January 2003, Pages 1-43.
**Remarks on the origins of morphophonemics in American structuralist
linguistics,** E. F. K. Koerner. Chomsky has led the public to believe that
he originated things which he borrowed from earlier linguists.

Science. 2008 Feb 1;319(5863):569; author reply 569. **Comparing social skills
of children and apes.** De Waal FB, Boesch C, Horner V, Whiten A. Letter

Curr Biol. 2007 Jun 19;17(12):1038-43. Epub 2007 Jun 7. **Transmission of
multiple traditions within and between chimpanzee groups.** Whiten A, Spiteri
A, Horner V, Bonnie KE, Lambeth SP, Schapiro SJ, de Waal FB. Centre for Social
Learning and Cognitive Evolution and Scottish Primate Research Group, School
of Psychology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews KY16 9JP, United Kingdom.
[A.whiten@st-andrews.ac.uk](mailto:A.whiten@st-andrews.ac.uk) Field reports
provide increasing evidence for local behavioral traditions among fish, birds,
and mammals. These findings are significant for evolutionary biology because
social learning affords faster adaptation than genetic change and has
generated new (cultural) forms of evolution. Orangutan and chimpanzee field
studies suggest that like humans, these apes are distinctive among animals in
each exhibiting over 30 local traditions. However, direct evidence is lacking
in apes and, with the exception of vocal dialects, in animals generally for
the intergroup transmission that would allow innovations to spread widely and
become evolutionarily significant phenomena. Here, we provide robust
experimental evidence that alternative foraging techniques seeded in different
groups of chimpanzees spread differentially not only within groups but
serially across two further groups with substantial fidelity. Combining these
results with those from recent social-diffusion studies in two larger groups
offers the first experimental evidence that a nonhuman species can sustain
unique local cultures, each constituted by multiple traditions. The
convergence of these results with those from the wild implies a richness in
chimpanzees' capacity for culture, a richness that parsimony suggests was
shared with our common ancestor.

J Comp Psychol. 2007 Feb;121(1):12-21. **Learning from others' mistakes?
limits on understanding a trap-tube task by young chimpanzees (Pan
troglodytes) and children (Homo sapiens).** Horner V, Whiten A. Centre for
Social Learning and Cognitive Evolution, School of Psychology, University of
St Andrews, Fife, Scotland, UK.
[Vhorner@rmy.emory.edu](mailto:Vhorner@rmy.emory.edu) A trap-tube task was
used to determine whether chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and children (Homo
sapiens) who observed a model's errors and successes could master the task in
fewer trials than those who saw only successes. Two- to 7-year-old chimpanzees
and 3- to 4-year-old children did not benefit from observing errors and found
the task difficult. Two of the 6 chimpanzees developed a successful
anticipatory strategy but showed no evidence of representing the core causal
relations involved in trapping. Three- to 4-year-old children showed a similar
limitation and tended to copy the actions of the demonstrator, irrespective of
their causal relevance. Five- to 6-year-old children were able to master the
task but did not appear to be influenced by social learning or benefit from
observing errors.

Proc Biol Sci. 2007 Feb 7;274(1608):367-72. **Spread of arbitrary conventions
among chimpanzees: a controlled experiment.** Bonnie KE, Horner V, Whiten A,
de Waal FB. Living Links, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Atlanta, GA
30329, USA. [Kebonni@emory.edu](mailto:Kebonni@emory.edu) Wild chimpanzees
(Pan troglodytes) have a rich cultural repertoire--traditions common in some
communities are not present in others. The majority of reports describe
functional, material traditions, such as tool use. Arbitrary conventions have
received far less attention. In the same way that observations of material
culture in wild apes led to experiments to confirm social transmission and
identify underlying learning mechanisms, experiments investigating how
arbitrary habits or conventions arise and spread within a group are also
required. The few relevant experimental studies reported thus far have relied
on cross-species (i.e. human-ape) interaction offering limited ecological
validity, and no study has successfully generated a tradition not involving
tool use in an established group. We seeded one of two rewarded alternative
endpoints to a complex sequence of behaviour in each of two chimpanzee groups.
Each sequence spread in the group in which it was seeded, with many
individuals unambiguously adopting the sequence demonstrated by a group
member. In one group, the alternative sequence was discovered by a low ranking
female, but was not learned by others. Since the action-sequences lacked
meaning before the experiment and had no logical connection with reward,
chimpanzees must have extracted both the form and benefits of these sequences
through observation of others.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 12;103(37):13878-83. **Faithful replication
of foraging techniques along cultural transmission chains by chimpanzees and
children.** Horner V, Whiten A, Flynn E, de Waal FB. Centre for Social
Learning and Cognitive Evolution, School of Psychology, University of St.
Andrews, Fife KY16 9JP, United Kingdom. Observational studies of wild
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) have revealed population-specific differences in
behavior, thought to represent cultural variation. Field studies have also
reported behaviors indicative of cultural learning, such as close observation
of adult skills by infants, and the use of similar foraging techniques within
a population over many generations. Although experimental studies have shown
that chimpanzees are able to learn complex behaviors by observation, it is
unclear how closely these studies simulate the learning environment found in
the wild. In the present study we have used a diffusion chain paradigm,
whereby a behavior is passed from one individual to the next in a linear
sequence in an attempt to simulate intergenerational transmission of a
foraging skill. Using a powerful three-group, two-action methodology, we found
that alternative methods used to obtain food from a foraging device ("lift
door" versus "slide door") were accurately transmitted along two chains of six
and five chimpanzees, respectively, such that the last chimpanzee in the chain
used the same method as the original trained model. The fidelity of
transmission within each chain is remarkable given that several individuals in
the no-model control group were able to discover either method by individual
exploration. A comparative study with human children revealed similar results.
This study is the first to experimentally demonstrate the linear transmission
of alternative foraging techniques by non-human primates. Our results show
that chimpanzees have a capacity to sustain local traditions across multiple
simulated generations.

Nature. 2005 Sep 29;437(7059):737-40. **Conformity to cultural norms of tool
use in chimpanzees.** Whiten A, Horner V, de Waal FB. Centre for Social
Learning and Cognitive Evolution, School of Psychology, University of St
Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9JP, UK. [A.whiten@st-
and.ac.uk](mailto:A.whiten@st-and.ac.uk) Rich circumstantial evidence suggests
that the extensive behavioural diversity recorded in wild great apes reflects
a complexity of cultural variation unmatched by species other than our own.
However, the capacity for cultural transmission assumed by this interpretation
has remained difficult to test rigorously in the field, where the scope for
controlled experimentation is limited. Here we show that experimentally
introduced technologies will spread within different ape communities.
Unobserved by group mates, we first trained a high-ranking female from each of
two groups of captive chimpanzees to adopt one of two different tool-use
techniques for obtaining food from the same 'Pan-pipe' apparatus, then re-
introduced each female to her respective group. All but two of 32 chimpanzees
mastered the new technique under the influence of their local expert, whereas
none did so in a third population lacking an expert. Most chimpanzees adopted
the method seeded in their group, and these traditions continued to diverge
over time. A subset of chimpanzees that discovered the alternative method
nevertheless went on to match the predominant approach of their companions,
showing a conformity bias that is regarded as a hallmark of human culture.

Anim Cogn. 2005 Jul;8(3):164-81. **Causal knowledge and imitation/emulation
switching in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and children (Homo sapiens).**
Horner V, Whiten A. Centre for Social Learning and Cognitive Evolution, School
of Psychology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9JU, UK. [Vkh1@st-
andrews.ac.uk](mailto:Vkh1@st-andrews.ac.uk) This study explored whether the
tendency of chimpanzees and children to use emulation or imitation to solve a
tool-using task was a response to the availability of causal information.
Young wild-born chimpanzees from an African sanctuary and 3- to 4-year-old
children observed a human demonstrator use a tool to retrieve a reward from a
puzzle-box. The demonstration involved both causally relevant and irrelevant
actions, and the box was presented in each of two conditions: opaque and
clear. In the opaque condition, causal information about the effect of the
tool inside the box was not available, and hence it was impossible to
differentiate between the relevant and irrelevant parts of the demonstration.
However, in the clear condition causal information was available, and subjects
could potentially determine which actions were necessary. When chimpanzees
were presented with the opaque box, they reproduced both the relevant and
irrelevant actions, thus imitating the overall structure of the task. When the
box was presented in the clear condition they instead ignored the irrelevant
actions in favour of a more efficient, emulative technique. These results
suggest that emulation is the favoured strategy of chimpanzees when sufficient
causal information is available. However, if such information is not
available, chimpanzees are prone to employ a **more comprehensive copy of an
observed action. In contrast to the chimpanzees, children employed imitation**
to solve the task in both conditions, at the expense of efficiency. We suggest
that the difference in performance of chimpanzees and children may be due to
**a greater susceptibility of children to cultural conventions,** perhaps
combined with a differential focus on the results, actions and goals of the
demonstrator.

Learn Behav. 2004 Feb;32(1):36-52. **How do apes ape?** Whiten A, Horner V,
Litchfield CA, Marshall-Pescini S. Centre for Social Learning and Cognitive
Evolution, Scottish Primate Research Group, School of Psychology, University
of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland. [A.whiten@st-
and.ac.uk](mailto:A.whiten@st-and.ac.uk) In the wake of telling critiques of
the foundations on which earlier conclusions were based, the last 15 years
have witnessed a renaissance in the study of social learning in apes. As a
result, we are able to review 31 experimental studies from this period in
which social learning in chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans has been
investigated. The principal question framed at the beginning of this era, Do
apes ape? has been answered in the affirmative, at least in certain
conditions. The more interesting question now is, thus, How do apes ape?
Answering this question has engendered richer taxonomies of the range of
social-learning processes at work and new methodologies to uncover them.
Together, these studies suggest that apes ape by employing a portfolio of
alternative social-learning processes in **flexibly adaptive ways,** in
conjunction with nonsocial learning. We conclude by sketching the kind of
decision tree that appears to underlie the deployment of these alternatives.  

[**_http://www.ucc.vt.edu/stdysk/vocabula.html_**](http://www.ucc.vt.edu/stdysk/vocabula.html)

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

