A R T I C L E Bone Density: First Do No Harm No topic can be understood in
isolation. People frequently ask me what they should do about their diagnosed
osteoporosis/osteopenia, and when they mention “computer controlled” and “dual
photon x-ray” bone density tests, my attention tends to jump past their bones,
their diet, and their hormones, to the way they must perceive themselves and
their place in the world. Are they aware that this is an x-ray that’s powerful
enough to differentiate very opaque bones from less opaque bones? The soft
tissues aren’t being studied, so they are allowed to be “overexposed” until
they appear black on the film. If a thick area like the thigh or hip is to be
measured, are they aware that the x-ray dose received at the surface where the
radiation enters might be 20 times more intense than the radiation that
reaches the film, and that the 90 or 95% of the missing energy has been
absorbed by the person’s cells? If I limited my response to answering the
question they thought they had asked me, I would feel that I had joined a
conspiracy against them. My answer has to assume that they are really asking
about their health, rather than about a particular medical diagnosis.
Neurologists are famous for making exquisitely erudite diagnoses of problems
that they can’t do anything to remedy. The owners of expensive dual photon
x-ray absorptiometer diagnostic machines are in a very different position. The
remedies for osteoporosis are things that everyone should be doing, anyway, so
diagnosis makes no difference in what the physician should recommend to the
patient. Most often, estrogen is prescribed for osteoporosis, and if the
doctors didn’t have their bone density tests, they would probably prescribe
estrogen anyway, “to protect the heart,” or “to prevent Alzheimer’s disease.”
Since I have already written about estrogen and those problems, there’s no
need to say more about it here, except that estrogen is the cause of a variety
of tissue atrophies, including the suppression of bone formation.[1] General
Electric, a major advocate of x-ray screening for osteoporosis and breast
cancer, has advertised that 91% of breast cancers could be cured if everyone
used their technology. Breast cancer has not decreased despite the massive
application of the technology, though the US government and others (using
crudely deceptive statistis) claim that the War on Cancer is being won.
Similarly, during the last decades when the “high technology” x-ray machines
have been more widely used, the age-specific incidence of osteoporosis has
increased tremendously. This apparently includes a higher rate of shortening
of stature with aging than in earlier generations.[2] I think there are
several reasons for avoiding x-ray tests of bone density, besides the simple
one that everyone should eat a bone-protective diet, regardless of the present
density of their bones. Even seemingly identical x-ray machines, or the same
machine at a different time, can give very different estimates of bone
density.[3-10] Radiologists evaluating the same images often reach very
different conclusions.[11] Changes in the tissue water and fat content can
make large differences in apparent bone density,[12] and estrogen, which
affects those, could appear to cause improved bone density, when it is merely
causing a generalized inflammatory condition, with edema. A machine that is
accurate when measuring an aluminum model, won’t necessarily give meaningful
results when the composition of the tissue, including the bone marrow, has
changed. Calcification of soft tissues can create the impression of increased
bone density.[13] Studies of large groups of people show such small annual
losses of bone density (around 1%), especially in the neck of the femur (which
is important in hip fractures) that the common technical errors of measurement
in an individual seem very large. Ultrasound devices can do an extremely good
job of evaluating both bone density and strength [14-16], rather than just
density. Ultrasound stimulates bone repair. X-rays accelerate the rate of bone
loss. X-rays do their harm at any dose; there is no threshold at which the
harm begins. X-ray damage is not limited to the area being investigated.
Deflected x-rays affect adjacent areas, and toxins produced by irradiated
cells travel in the bloodstream, causing systemic effects. Dental x-rays cause
thyroid cancer and eye cancer. Recent experiments have shown that low doses of
radiation cause delayed death of brain cells. The action of x-rays produces
tissue inflammation, and diseases as different as Alzheimer’s disease and
heart disease result from prolonged inflammatory processes. I have never known
a physician who knew, or cared, what dose of radiation his patients were
receiving. I have never known a patient who could get that information from
their doctors. The radiation exposure used to measure bone density may be
higher (especially when the thigh and hip are x-rayed) than the exposure in
dental x-rays, but dental x-rays are known to increase the incidence of
cancer. Often, dentists have their receptionists do the x-rays, which probably
doesn’t matter, since the dentist is usually no more concerned than the
receptionist about understanding, and minimizing, the dose. Even radiological
specialists seldom are interested in the doses they use diagnostically. It was
only after a multitude of dentists had a finger amputated that it became
standard practice to ask the patient to hold the film, while the dentist stood
safely back away from the rays. Just after the beginning of the century,
Thomas Edison was helping to popularize x-rays, but the horrible death of his
chief technician turned Edison into an enemy of the technology. By the 1940s,
the dangers of radiation were coming to be understood by the general public,
and it was only the intervention of the US government, to popularize atomic
bombs and nuclear power, that was able to reverse the trend. In 1956 and 1957,
Linus Pauling was the only well known scientist who opposed the government’s
policies. The government took away his passport, and his opportunities to
write and speak were limited by a boycott imposed by a variety of
institutions, but instigated by the nuclear industry and its agent, the Atomic
Energy Commission. The government which considered Pauling a threat to
national security, had placed thousands of German and Hungarian “ex”-Nazis in
high positions in industry and government agencies, after protecting them from
prosecution as war criminals. The official government policy, directed by the
financier Admiral Strauss who controlled the Atomic Energy Commision, was to
tell the public that radiation was good. Their extreme secrecy regarding their
radiation experiments on Americans, however, indicated that they were aware of
the malignant nature of their activities; many of the records were simply
destroyed, so that no one could ever know what had been done. Scientists who
worked for the government, Willard Libby, John Goffman, and many others, were
working to convince the public that they shouldn’t worry. Of the multitude of
scientists who served the government during that time, only a few ever came to
oppose those policies, and those who did were unable to keep their jobs or
research grants. Gofman has become the leader in the movement to protect the
public against radiation, especially, since 1971, through the Committee for
Nuclear Responsibility, PO Box 421993, San Francisco, CA 94132.. Gofman has
said: "I was stupid in those days. In 1955, '56, people like Linus Pauling
were saying that the bomb fallout would cause all this trouble. I thought,
'We're not sure. If you're not sure, don't stand in the way of progress.' I
could not have thought anything more stupid in my life. "The big moment in my
life happened while I was giving a health lecture to nuclear engineers. In the
middle of my talk it hit me! What the hell am I saying? If you don't know
whether low doses are safe or not, going ahead is exactly wrong. At that
moment, I changed my position entirely."[17] In 1979, Gofman said: "There is
no way I can justify my failure to help sound an alarm over these activities
many years sooner than I did. I feel that at least several hundred scientists
trained in the biomedical aspect of atomic energy - myself definitely included
- are candidates for Nuremburg-type trials for crimes against humanity for our
gross negligence and irresponsibility. Now that we know the hazard of low-dose
radiation, the crime is not experimentation - it's murder." [18] Many ordinary
people were making exactly that argument in the 1950s, but government
censorship kept the most incriminating evidence from the public. The climate
of intimidation spread throughout the culture, so that teachers who spoke
about the dangers of radiation were called disloyal, and were fired. Now,
people who don’t want x-rays are treated as crackpots. Probably because of
this cultural situation, Gofman’s recommendations are very mild--simply for
doctors to use good technology and to know what they are doing, which could
lead to ten-fold or even hundred-fold dose reduction. Even with such mild
restraint in the use of diagnostic x-rays, Gofman’s well founded estimate is
that 250,000 deaths caused by radiation could be prevented annually. I believe
many more deaths would be prevented if ultrasound and MRI were used
consistently instead of x-rays. Using Gofman’s estimate, I think we can blame
at least ten million deaths on just the medical x-rays that have been used
inappropriately because of the policies of the U.S. government in the last
half century. That wouldn’t include the deaths caused by radioactive fallout
from bomb tests and leaks from nuclear power plants, or the vast numbers of
people mentally impaired by all sorts of toxic radiation. Although nearly all
the people who committed the radiation crimes of the 1950s and 1960s have died
or retired, the culture they created remains in the mass media and scientific
journals, and in the medical and academic professions. Medical journals
describe ways to minimize diagnostic x-ray exposure, and they advocate many
seemingly effective treatments for osteoporosis, giving an impression that
progress is being made in “managing” osteoporosis, but the real situation is
very different. Fractures resulting from osteoporosis are increasing, and
osteoporosis is affecting younger and younger people. I think it would be
reasonable to say that a woman with osteoporosis is usually better off when
it’s not diagnosed, because of the dangerous things prescribed for it.
Estrogen has become the main “treatment” for osteoporosis, but many of the
other ways of “managing” osteoporosis are both ineffective and unsafe. Many
women are told to stop taking a thyroid supplement when osteoporosis is
diagnosed, but hypothyroidism often leads to hyperprolactinema and
hypercortisolemia, which are two of the most clearly established causes of
osteoporosis. Calcitonin, vitamin D-active metabolite, and estrogen-”HRT”
treaments can cause respiratory alkalosis (relative hyperventilation),[19-24]
and hypothyroidism produces a predisposition to hyperventilation.[25]
Hyperventilation tends to cause calcium loss. In respiratory alkalolis, CO2
(and sometimes bicarbonate) are decreased, impairing calcium retention, and in
“metabolic alkalosis,” with increased bicarbonate, calcium is retained more
efficiently and bone formation is stimulated, and its dissolution is
suppressed. Other women are told to reduce their protein consumption, or to
take fluoride or whatever drug has been most recently promoted. A protein
deficiency is a clear cause of osteoporosis, and bone density corresponds to
the amount of protein consumed. Milk protein, especially, protects against
osteoporosis, independently of milk’s other important nutrients. Too much
fluoride clearly increases the risk of bone fractures,[26] and the side
effects of other drugs haven’t been properly studied in humans, while they
often have dangerous effects in animals. Calcium, magnesium, vitamin A,
vitamin B6- , vitamin K, and vitamin D are important for the development and
maintenance of bones. For example, a vitamin A deficiency limits the synthesis
of progesterone and proteins. In calcium deficiency, parathyroid hormone is
increased, and tends to cause the typical changes of aging, shifting calcium
from hard tissues to soft, and decreasing the ratio of extracellular to
intracellular (excitatory) calcium. Polyunsaturated fats are converted to
prostaglandins (especially under the influence of estrogen), and several
prostaglandins have toxic effects on bone. Those fats also suppress the
formation of thyroid hormone and progesterone. The increased use of the
unsaturated oils has coincided with the increase of osteoporosis. The
oxidation of proteins caused by free radicals is increased with aging and by
the use of unsaturated fats, and it contributes to tissue atrophy, including
the age-related shrinkage of the bones. In animal studies, “adequate” dietary
protein, 13.8% of the diet (equivalent to about 80 grams per day for a person)
is associated with more oxidative damage to tissue proteins than the very high
protein diets, 25.7% or 51.3%, that would be equivalent to about 150 or 300
grams of protein daily for a person.[27] Yet, many physicians recommend a low
protein diet to protect against osteoporosis. Avoiding fluoridated water and
the polyunsaturated oils, and drinking two quarts of milk daily (which will
provide only 66 grams of protein), and using some other nutrient-rich foods
such as eggs and fruits, are probably the basic things to protect the bones.
For vitamins, especially K, occasional liver can be helpful. Meats, fruits,
leaves, and coffee are rich in magnesium. Some people have argued that the
acidity of urine produced by eating meat causes calcium loss. However, a high
protein diet also improves the absorption of calcium by the intestine. Another
overlooked function of dietary protein is that it stimulates insulin
secretion, and insulin is anabolic for bone.[28] The same diet that protects
against osteoporosis, i.e., plenty of protein and calcium, etc., also protects
against kidney stones and other abnormal calcificatons. REFERENCES 1\. Proc
Assoc Am Physicians 1996 Mar;108(2):155-64 Potential mechanism of estrogen-
mediated decrease in bone formation: estrogen increases production of
inhibitory insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-4. Kassem M, Okazaki R,
De Leon D, Harris SA, Robinson JA, Spelsberg TC, Conover CA, Riggs BL. 2\. Am
J Phys Anthropol 1990 Dec;83(4):467-76. Stature loss among an older United
States population and its relation to bone mineral status. Galloway A, Stini
WA, Fox SC, Stein P. “With advancing age there is a gradual decrease in height
apparently beginning in the mid-40s. Thereafter, there is a relatively rapid
decrease in measured height. This contrasts to the much slower rates predicted
from earlier populations (Trotter and Gleser: American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 9:311-324, 1951). The rate of stature loss is associated with
diminution of bone mineral density as well as with maximum height. Since there
are suggestions of a secular trend toward greater reductions in bone mineral
density, this study suggests there may be a secular trend toward an increase
in statural loss with age.” 3\. Rofo Fortschr Geb Rontgenstr Neuen Bildgeb
Verfahr 1994 Mar;160(3):260-5. [The quantitative determination of bone mineral
content--a system comparison of similarly built computed tomographs]. [Article
in German] Andresen R, Radmer S, Banzer D, Felsenberg D, Wolf KJ Klinik fur
Radiologie, Universitatsklinikum Steglitz der FU Berlin. An intercomparison of
4 CT scanners of the same manufacturer was performed. The bone mineral content
of 11 lumbar vertebral columns removed directly post mortem was determined in
a specially constructed lucite-water phantom. Even devices of the same
construction were shown to yield a variation in the quantitative evaluation
markedly exceeding the annual physiological mineral loss. As long as scanner
adjustment by physical calibration phantoms has not yet been established, a
course assessment and therapy control of bone mineral content should always be
carried out on the same QCT scanner. 4\. Osteoporos Int 1990 Oct;1(1):23-9.
Vertebral bone mineral density measured laterally by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry. Slosman DO, Rizzoli R, Donath A, Bonjour JP. “The bone mineral
density (BMD) of lumbar vertebrae in the anteroposterior (AP) view may be
overestimated in osteoarthritis or with aortic calcification, which are common
in elderly.” “Then, we compared the capability of BMD LAT and BMD AP scans for
monitoring bone loss related to age and for discriminating the BMD of
postmenopausal women with nontraumatic vertebral fractures from that of young
subjects. In vitro, when a spine phantom was placed in lateral position in the
middle of 26 cm of water in order to simulate both soft-tissue thickness and
X-ray source remoteness, the coefficient of variation (CV) of six repeated
determinations of BMD was 1.0%. In vivo, the CV of paired BMD LAT measurements
obtained in 20 healthy volunteers after repositioning was 2.8%.” 5\. Eur J
Nucl Med 1990;17(1-2):3-9. Comparative study of the performances of X-ray and
gadolinium 153 bone densitometers at the level of the spine, femoral neck and
femoral shaft. Slosman DO, Rizzoli R, Buchs B, Piana F, Donath A, Bonjour JP.
“In vivo, at the spine level, with DPA, mean CV of BMD measured 6 times after
repositioning in 6 healthy volunteers was 3.8% +/- 1.9% and 2.1% +/- 0.7% . .
. .” 6\. Rofo Fortschr Geb Rontgenstr Neuen Bildgeb Verfahr 1995
Apr;162(4):269-73. [Experimental studies of the visualization of the vertebral
body spongiosa by high-resolution computed tomography]. Henschel MG,
Freyschmidt J, Holland BR. “The measured lower limit of visualisation of
cancellous bone structures is clearly worse than expected from the
measurements of spatial resolution with standard phantoms used for HR-CT (0.6
versus 0.4 mm). True and exact imaging of normal cancellous bone cannot be
achieved even by modern HR-CT. Noise creates structures mimicking cancellous
bone.” 7\. J Comput Tomogr 1984 Apr;8(2):91-7. Quantitative computed
tomography assessment of spinal trabecular bone. I. Age-related regression in
normal men and women. Firooznia H, Golimbu C, Rafii M, Schwartz MS, Alterman
ER. “Computed tomography, utilized in conjunction with a calibrated phantom
containing a set of reference densities (K2HPO4 and water), is capable of
determining the mineral content of the trabecular bone of the spine with an
accuracy of about 6% of the ash weight of the vertebrae scanned (specimen
studies).” 8\. Calcif Tissue Int 1991 Sep;49(3):174-8. Precision and stability
of dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry measurements. Johnson J, Dawson-Hughes B.
“The phantom was scanned repeatedly in 15.2, 20.3, and 27.9 cm of water over a
9 month period. In 15.2 and 20.3 cm of water, phantom BMD did not vary
significantly whereas in 27.9 cm of water (equivalent to a human over 30 cm
thick), phantom BMD increased 2.3% (P = 0.01) over the 9 months.” 9\. J Comput
Assist Tomogr 1993 Nov-Dec;17(6):945-51. Influence of temperature on QCT:
implications for mineral densitometry. Whitehouse RW, Economou G, Adams JE.
“Inaccuracies in quantitative CT (QCT) for vertebral bone mineral measurements
may result from differences between the temperature of the vertebrae and the
calibration standards.” “In the computer simulation, the fat error associated
with single energy QCT for trabecular bone mineral densitometry was 20% less
for specimens at room temperature than at body temperature.” “The fat error of
single energy QCT for mineral densitometry may have been underestimated in
previous in vitro studies using vertebral specimens scanned at room
temperature.” 10\. Phys Med Biol 1986 Jan;31(1):55-63. Quantitative CT
measurements: the effect of scatter acceptance and filter characteristics on
the EMI 7070. Merritt RB, Chenery SG “Non-linearities in projection values on
computed tomography (CT) scanners cause corresponding errors in derived
Hounsfield unit attenuation measurements. Existing commercial machines have
been refined for clinical usefulness but not necessarily for quantitative
accuracy.”“It is concluded that, irrespective of any quality assurance
protocol, interpatient and interslice errors can be expected to range from 3
to 10% for water-equivalent materials and the intraslice positional dependence
of the CT number can vary up to 5% for dense bone-like materials in a uniform
phantom.” 11\. Skeletal Radiol 1986;15(5):347-9. Observer variation in the
detection of osteopenia. Epstein DM, Dalinka MK, Kaplan FS, Aronchick JM,
Marinelli DL, Kundel HL. In order to determine observer variation in the
detection of osteopenia, 15 pairs of lateral chest radiographs obtained within
two weeks of each other were reviewed separately by two radiologists and one
orthopedist on three separate occasions. Intra- and interobserver variations
were calculated for each individual film and film pairs using Kappa values.
The individual observers were not able to give consistent readings on the same
film on different days (average Kappa = 0.54). When the additional factors of
repeat films (average kappa = 0.47), or separate observers (average Kappa =
0.38) were analyzed, agreement was even worse.The identification of osteopenia
from the lateral view of the thoracic spine is highly subjective and variable
from film to film and observer to observer. 12\. P. Schneider and C. Reiners,
Letter, JAMA 277(1), 23, Jan. 1, 1997. "The influence of fat distribution on
bone mass measurements with DEXA can be of considerable magnitude and ranges
up to 10% error per 2 cm of fat." 13\. Calcif Tissue Int 1990 Apr;46(4):280-1.
Effect of radiographic abnormalities on rate of bone loss from the spine.
Dawson-Hughes B, Dallal GE. “Spurious rates of loss of spine BMD are likely to
be found in subjects with calcification of the aorta, osteophytes or other
abnormalities in the spine scan field. This should be kept in mind when serial
spine scans are being considered in these subjects.” 14\. Przegl Lek
2000;57(2):93-9. [No title available]. Jaworski M, Lorenc RS. “. . .Dual
Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA) method is a reference method to diagnose
osteoporosis. This method allows to measure bone density and bone mass,
however bone quality can not be estimated. Quantitative ultrasound (QUS)method
provides information about bone structure.” 15\. Osteoporos Int
2000;11(4):354-60. Assessment of a new quantitative ultrasound calcaneus
measurement: precision and discrimination of hip fractures in elderly women
compared with dual X-ray absorptiometry. He YQ, Fan B, Hans D, Li J, Wu CY,
Njeh CF, Zhao S, Lu Y, Tsuda-Futami E, Fuerst T, Genant HK. 16\. Cas Lek Cesk
2000 Apr 26;139(8):231-6 [X-ray densitometry and ultrasonography of the heel
bone--sensitivity and comparison with densitometry of the axial skeleton].
[Article in Czech] Michalska D, Zikan V, Stepan J, Weichetova M, Kubova V,
Krenkova J, Masatova A. “The DXA of the heel underestimates the prevalence of
osteoporosis. The results of the heel QUS (Stiffness) appear to be better
correlated to femoral BMD than heel BMD.” 17\. John Gofman, M.D. (biographical
chapter. pages 401-412.) In Studs Terkel's book Coming of Age. The Story of
our Century by Those Who Lived It. The New Press. NY. 1995. 18\. Gofman, J.W.
An irreverent, illustrated view of nuclear power. Committee for Nuclear
Responsibility. San Francisco, CA. pp. 227-228, 1979. 19\. Kidney Int 1992
Sep;42(3):727-34. Chronic respiratory alkalosis induces renal PTH-resistance,
hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia in humans. Krapf R, Jaeger P, Hulter HN
Department of Medicine, Insel University Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. “The
effects of chronic respiratory alkalosis on divalent ion homeostasis have not
been reported in any species.” “Chronic respiratory alkalosis (delta PaCO2,
-8.4 mm Hg, delta[H+] -3.2 nmol/liter) resulted in a sustained decrement in
plasma ionized calcium concentration (delta[IoCa++]p, -0.10 mmol/liter, P less
than 0.05) and a sustained increment in plasma phosphate concentration
(delta[PO4]p, +0.14 mmol/liter, P less than 0.005) associated with increased
fractional excretion of Ca++ . . .” 20\. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999
Jun;84(6):1997-2001 Hormone replacement therapy causes a respiratory alkalosis
in normal postmenopausal women. Orr-Walker BJ, Horne AM, Evans MC, Grey AB,
Murray MA, McNeil AR, Reid IR. “Serum bicarbonate concentrations decreased
significantly in the groups receiving either MPA or estrogen plus MPA (P =
0.008). This trend was apparent as early as 2 days and reached 2.7 and 2.3
mmol/L in the respective groups by 3 months. Similar changes were seen with
partial pressure of carbon dioxide. . . .”“Accompanying changes in blood pH
were apparent in the estrogen plus MPA group, where there was an upward trend
at 1 week (P = 0.056) and a significant change from baseline (+0.013) at 3
months (P = 0.03).” 21\. Wien Klin Wochenschr 1979 Apr 27;91(9):304-7
[Investigations on the pathogenesis of distal renal tubular acidosis]. Schabel
F, Zieglauer H. “Bicarbonate loading is followed by a lowering of calcium
excretion to within the normal range and a decrease in the uncharacteristic
renal hyperaminoaciduria.” 22\. Calcif Tissue Int 1984 Sep;36(5):604-7.
Respiratory alkalosis and reduced plasmatic concentration of ionized calcium
in rats treated with 1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol. Locatto ME, Fernandez MC,
Caferra DA, Gimenez MC, Vidal MC, Puche RC. “The daily administration of
supraphysiological doses of 1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol (0.1-2.5
micrograms/d/100 g body weight) to rats, produced respiratory alkalosis. With
the doses of 0.1-0.2 micrograms/d/100 g and feeding a diet with 0.7% of
calcium, calcemias did not exceed 2.75 mM, and significantly reduced plasma
ionized calcium levels were measured. The latter phenomenon was found
associated with increased urinary excretion of cAMP, soft tissue calcium
content, and polyuria with hypostenuria, all known effects of parathyroid
hormone.” 23\. Am J Physiol 1996 Jul;271(1 Pt 2):F216-22. Metabolic alkalosis
decreases bone calcium efflux by suppressing osteoclasts and stimulating
osteoblasts. Bushinsky DA. “In vivo and in vitro evidence indicates that
metabolic acidosis, which may occur prior to complete excretion of end
products of metabolism, increases urinary calcium excretion.The additional
urinary calcium is almost certainly derived from bone mineral.” “To determine
whether metabolic alkalosis alters net calcium efflux (JCa+) from bone and
bone cell function, we cultured neonatal mouse calvariae for 48 h in either
control medium (pH approximately equal to 7.4, [HCO3-] approximately equal to
24), medium simulating mild alkalosis (pH approximately equal to 7.5, [HCO3-]
approximately equal to 31), or severe alkalosis (pH approximately equal to
7.6, [HCO3-] approximately equal to 39) and measured JCa+ and the release of
osteoclastic beta-glucuronidase and osteoblastic collagen synthesis. Compared
with control, metabolic alkalosis caused a progressive decrease in JCa+, which
was correlated inversely with initial medium pH (pHi). Alkalosis caused a
decrease in osteoclastic beta-glucuronidase release, which was correlated
inversely with pHi and directly with JCa+. Alkalosis also caused an increase
in osteoblastic collagen synthesis, which was correlated directly with pHi and
inversely with JCa+. There was a strong inverse correlation between the
effects alkalosis on osteoclastic beta-glucuronidase release and osteoblastic
collagen synthesis. Thus metabolic alkalosis decreases JCa+ from bone, at
least in part, by decreasing osteoclastic resorption and increasing
osteoblastic formation. These results suggest that the provision of base to
neutralize endogenous acid production may improve bone mineral accretion.”
24\. Am J Physiol 1997 Nov;273(5 Pt 2):F698-705 The effects of respiratory
alkalosis and acidosis on net bicarbonate flux along the rat loop of Henle in
vivo. Unwin R, Stidwell R, Taylor S, Capasso G. 25\. Can J Anaesth 1999
Feb;46(2):185-9. Acute respiratory alkalosis associated with low minute
ventilation in a patient with severe hypothyroidism. Lee HT, Levine M. “His
profoundly lowered basal metabolic rate and decreased CO2 production,
resulting probably from severe hypothyroidism, may have resulted in
development of acute respiratory alkalosis in spite of concurrently diminished
minute ventilation.” 26\. Am J Epidemiol 1991 Apr 1;133(7):649-60. A
prospective study of bone mineral content and fracture in communities with
differential fluoride exposure. Sowers MF, Clark MK, Jannausch ML, Wallace RB.
“Residence in the higher-fluoride community was associated with a
significantly lower radial bone mass in premenopausal and postmenopausal
women, an increased rate of radial bone mass loss in premenopausal women, and
significantly more fractures among postmenopausal women. There was no
difference in the 5-year relative risk of any fracture in the higher-calcium
community versus the control community; however, the relative risk was 2.1
(95% confidence interval (CI) 1.0-4.4) in women in the higher-fluoride
community compared with women in the control community.There was no difference
in the 5-year risk of wrist, spine, or hip fracture in the higher-calcium
community versus the control community; however, the 5-year relative risk for
women in the higher-fluoride community, compared with women in the control
community, was 2.2 (95% CI 1.1-4.7). Estimates of risk were adjusted for age
and body size.” 27\. J Nutr 2000 Dec;130(12):2889-96. Long-term high protein
intake does not increase oxidative stress in rats. Petzke KJ, Elsner A, Proll
J, Thielecke F, Metges CC. 28\. Med Hypotheses 1995 Sep;45(3):241-6. Anabolic
effects of insulin on bone suggest a role for chromium picolinate in
preservation of bone density. McCarty MF. “Physiological levels of insulin
reduce the ability of PTH to activate protein kinase C in osteoblasts,
suggesting that insulin may be a physiological antagonist of bone resorption.
In addition, insulin is known to promote collagen production by osteoblasts.”
[I think chromium is too toxic to use as a supplement.] 29: Anesthesiology
1998 Dec;89(6):1389-400. Effects of hyperventilation and
hypocapnic/normocapnic hypoxemia on renal function and lithium clearance in
humans. Vidiendal Olsen N, Christensen H, Klausen T, Fogh-Andersen N, Plum I,
Kanstrup IL, Hansen JM Department of Neuroanaesthesia, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Denmark. NVO@DADLNET.DK BACKGROUND: Using the renal clearance of
lithium as an index of proximal tubular outflow, this study tested the
hypothesis that acute hypocapnic hypoxemia decreases proximal tubular
reabsorption to the same extent as hypocapnic normoxemia (hyperventilation)
and that this response is blunted during normocapnic hypoxemia. METHODS: Eight
persons were studied on five occasions: (1) during inhalation of 10% oxygen
(hypocapnic hypoxemia), (2) during hyperventilation of room air leading to
carbon dioxide values similar to those with hypocapnic hypoxemia, (3) during
inhalation of 10% oxygen with the addition of carbon dioxide to produce
normocapnia, (4) during normal breathing of room air through the same tight-
fitting face mask as used on the other study days, and (5) during breathing of
room air without the face mask. RESULTS: Hypocapnic and normocapnic hypoxemia
and hyperventilation increased cardiac output, respiratory minute volume, and
effective renal plasma flow. Glomerular filtration rate remained unchanged on
all study days. Calculated proximal tubular reabsorption decreased during
hypocapnic hypoxemia and hyperventilation but remained unchanged with
normocapnic hypoxemia. Sodium clearance increasedslightly during hypocapnic
and normocapnic hypoxemia, hyperventilation, and normocapnic normoxemia with
but not without the face mask. CONCLUSIONS:The results indicate that (1)
respiratory alkalosis with or without hypoxemia decreases proximal tubular
reabsorption and that this effect, but not renal vasodilation or natriuresis,
can be abolished by adding carbon dioxide to the hypoxic gas; (2) the
increases in the effective renal plasma flow were caused by increased
ventilation rather than by changes in arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide
levels; and (3) the natriuresis may be secondary to increased renal perfusion,
but application of a face mask also may increase sodium excretion. 31: Wien
Klin Wochenschr 1979 Apr 27;91(9):304-7. [Investigations on the pathogenesis
of distal renal tubular acidosis]. [Article in German] Schabel F, Zieglauer H
In distal (type 1) RTA, renal acid excretion is impaired by the inability to
establish adequate pH gradients between plasma and distal tubular fluid at any
level of acidosis. Main clinical signs in infancy are anorexia, vomiting and
failure to thrive. Despite low serum bicarbonate levels the renal threshold of
bicarbonate is normal, while urinary pH levels are high even with values below
the threshold. Under conditions of bicarbonate-induced systemic alkalosis
urinary the pCO2 exceeds blood pCO2 in normal subjects. by contrast, the
urinary pCO2 tension is not significantly greater in distal RTA, indicating a
failure of the cells of the distal nephron to secrete hydrogen ions even
without a gradient. Red cell carbonic anhydrase is within the normal range,
whilst the inhibition of carbonic anhydrase activity has no effect on distal
tubular function. Until now no histological or enzymatic defect could be
detected to explain the ineffective acidification. Bicarbonate loading is
followed by a lowering of calcium excretion to within the normal range and a
decrease in the uncharacteristic renal hyperaminoaciduria. ^^^ Top ^^^

