A R T I C L E Breast Cancer It’s important to know the realities of cancer in
the population, the death rate from cancer, and the effects of its aggressive
diagnosis and treatment. Appreciating those, I think the need for a new
attitude toward cancer can be seen. Official US data for the years 1990 to
1993 showed 505,300 cancer deaths in 1990, and 529,900 cancer deaths in 1993.
This was an increase of roughly 1.3% per year (which was faster than the
population growth) during the time in which Rodu and Cole (1996) and agencies
of the U.S. government claimed the death rate was decreasing one half percent
(0.5%) per year. This increase happened despite the abnormal population bulge
in the number of people between the ages of 35 and 50, resulting from the
postwar baby boom. Cancer incidence is about ten times higher among the older
population than in this younger age range, so in this abnormally structured
population, the death rate from cancer is much lower than it would be if the
population composition were the same as before the war, and it is lower than
it will be in ten or twenty years, when the population bulge reaches the prime
cancer years. In 1994, total cancer deaths increased to 536,900 (an increase
of 1.32% over 1993). The crude death rate per 100,000 population was 203.2 in
1990, in 1993 it was 205.6, in 1994 it had increased to 206. This, despite the
population distortion caused by the baby boom, causing a scarcity of people in
the age groups with the highest rates of cancer mortality. In the U.S. in 1994
there were altogether 2,286,000 deaths. In a population of about 260 million,
this was a death rate of less than 1% per year (about 0.88%). The chance of
dying that year for any person was less than one in a hundred. That doesn’t
mean that life expectancy is over 100 years, but that would be implied if we
ignored the population bulge of the baby boomers, as the cancer statisticians
are doing. When the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and every
major medical journal in the United States lies about the simple statistics of
cancer death rates, it’s clear that very powerful and dangerous social forces
are operating. Anyone who knows about the baby boom that started right after
the second world war must also realize that in 1940, at the end of the great
depression, when infant and childhood mortality was very high and people
postponed having children, the population had a disproportionate number of old
people, and that it would be outrageous to use the rate of cancer in the pre-
war population to evaluate the rate of cancer in the post-war population. But
that is what is being done, and the mass media are helping to prevent the
public from questioning the official story about cancer. If the health of the
population in 1940 is to be compared to that of a very differently constituted
later population, the appropriate method is to compare the rate of death among
people of a certain age. The death rate from leukemia, especially among
children, was greatly increased in the post-war years, when people were being
exposed to radiation from atomic bomb tests. The death rates among adults of
various ages, from breast cancer, prostate cancer, and melanoma have steadily
increased. Rodu and Cole, who declared victory in the war against cancer, said
the decline in total cancer mortality began in 1991. (Cole and Rodu, 1996) If
lung cancer is excluded, they say mortality from other cancers has been
declining since 1950! (“The fifty-year decline of cancer in America,” Rodu and
Cole, 2001.) The first time I saw this bizarre use of “age restandardization”
was when Professor Bruce Ames was on a lecture tour for the American Cancer
Society, and was speaking to the biology department at the University of
Oregon. He showed a graph indicating that the mortality curves for most types
of cancer in the U.S. had begun their downward curve in the late 1940s just
after the A.C.S. came onto the scene. Even though I think the A.C.S. probably
initiated the practice of age-standardizing with reference to the 1940
population, they don’t always find that date suitable for their purposes. In
fund-raising literature showing their past success in curing childhood
leukemia, they restandardized mortality with reference to the postwar year
when the leukemia death rate was at its highest, with the result that their
cures appeared to be steadily lowering the death rate. But the incidence rate
varied according to the intensity of the radioactive intensity that pregnant
women were exposed to, and so both the incidence and the mortality fell after
atmospheric testing was stopped. Government officials, editors of the big
medical journals, professors and broadcasters, have been able to get away with
this huge statistical fraud. I suspect that they will soon feel encouraged to
simply make up the data that they want, because eventually “age
standardization” isn’t going to work to hide the actual increases in
mortality. Since people with cancer usually die of something else, such as a
stroke or heart failure, it will be no trick at all to make cancer mortality
decline to be replaced by other causes of death. The precedent for such
fabulizing of data exists in the FDA’s approval of AZT, and other less
notorious drugs. Radiation, estrogen, and a variety of chemical pollutants are
known to be the major causes of breast cancer, but the efforts of the cancer
establishment have been directed toward denying that these avoidable agents
are the cause of the great increase in breast cancer during the last several
decades. The cancer industry, including major producers of chemotherapy drugs,
subsidizes the American Cancer Society and “Breast Cancer Awareness Week,” and
it is in their interest to convince the public that early detection and
conventional treatment with surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation are winning
the war against cancer. There is always light at the end of the tunnel, in the
war against cancer, just as there was in the Vietnam war. Their consistent
effort to dissuade the government from acting to reduce the public’s exposure
to the known causes of cancer should make it clear that they are in the
business of treating cancer, not eliminating it. In the 1960s I read some
articles in a small town newspaper about Leonell Strong’s cancer research, and
his treatment by the American Cancer Society and the Salk Institute. Leonell
Strong had developed strains of mice for use in cancer research. In some of
the strains, 100% of the females developed mammary cancer. Strong had
demonstrated that these strains had very high levels of estrogen. He showed me
mice that he had treated with simple extracts of liver, that were free of
cancer, and whose descendants remained free of cancer for several generations.
Strong had received his PhD in genetics under T. H. Morgan. For a person
trained in classical genetics, and who had spent his career developing the
supposedly genetically determined cancer trait, the elimination of the trait
by a few injections must have been hard to understand, but at least he tried
to understand it. When he had earlier demonstrated the presence of a virus in
the milk of cancer-prone mice, and when he showed the role of heredity in
cancer, he was popular with the cancer business, but when he showed that
“genetic” cancer could be eradicated with a simple treatment, he became the
object of official abuse. He said that the Salk institute had offered him a
position to induce him to move with his large colony of mice from New York to
San Diego, but when he arrived he found that he had no job, and his records of
decades of research had been lost. He said that a memo which was discovered in
a lawsuit revealed that the institute had just wanted his mice, and never
intended to give him the promised job. For the cancer establishment, his
discovery of a way to prevent cancer was not welcome. In 1969, two years
before the war against cancer had begun pouring public money into the pockets
of the cancer establishment, Harry Rubin gave a lecture that criticized the
cancer establishment’s claim that it was curing cancer. He cited a study by a
pathologist who had looked for cancer in the tissues of people who had been
killed in accidents. He found identifiable cancers in the tissues of everyone
over the age of fifty that he examined. If everyone over 50 has histologically
detectable cancer, then the use of biopsy specimens as the basis for
determining whether a person needs treatment has no scientific basis. The
definition of a disease, and the recognition of its presence, has an important
place in medicine, but understanding its cause or causes is essential for both
treatment and prevention. The dominant belief in medicine is that diseases are
significantly caused by “genes,” including diseases such as cancer, diabetes,
psychoses, and neurological diseases. In Israel, ethnic groups that had never
had much diabetes before immigrating, within a single generation had diabetes
as often as other Israelis. Shortly after insulin became available for the
treatment of diabetes, the incidence of the disease in the U.S. began to
increase. The simple death rate from diabetes per 100,000 population is now
higher than it was in 1920, before insulin treatment became available.
Neurological diseases and autoimmune diseases, along with diabetes and cancer,
have increased greatly in recent generations. These simply aren’t genetic
diseases, and there should be a shift of resources away from useless or
harmful treatments toward their prevention. Even when a disease’s cause isn’t
clearly understood, it is essential to use logical thinking in diagnosing its
presence. The presence of a certain gene or “genetic marker” is often thought
to have great diagnostic significance, which it rarely has. But even gross
“signs” of a disease can be used diagnostically only if we know that similar
signs aren’t present in perfectly healthy people. When pains are thought to be
the result of a herniated intervertebral disk, x-ray pictures may be produced
as confirmation of the diagnosis. But when people without pains are just as
likely to have herniated disks (about 2/3 of normal people have them), the
diagnosis fails to be convincing. When x-rays or MRIs show “plaques” in the
head, multiple sclerosis is often “confirmed,” but when normal medical
students show just as many brain plaques, the diagnosis must be questioned.
Similarly, when mature people who were perfectly healthy until they were
killed by an accident are found to always have identifiable cancers, any
diagnosis of cancer that is based on a similar histological specimen must be
reconsidered. By diagnosing something that is as common and trivial as
dandruff as “cancer,” physicians can get a very high rate of cures, whether
they use surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy. Abnormal cellular proliferation
is usually harmless, but it has become an important part of a business that
makes several billion dollars per year, with no definite benefits except the
financial benefits for those in the business. Before cancer treatment became
culturally practically obligatory, and when fewer people died of cancer, some
people lived into old age with clearly “malignant” cancers, and died of some
other cause. The policy of leaving a cancer alone is now established for
prostate cancer in old men. Until there is clear evidence to the contrary, a
similar policy might be appropriate for many kinds of cancer. If every year
more people are treated for cancer, and every year more people die of cancer,
one simply wonders whether fewer people would die if few were treated. If the
first rule of medicine is to do no harm, then the second rule, growing out of
the first, would have to be to give no treatment without knowing what is being
treated, and to have a valid basis for believing that the damage done by the
treatment is not worse than the damage that the disease would cause. If cancer
specialists haven’t demonstrated that their treatments improve their patients’
situation, then their professional activities aren’t justified; the statistics
suggest that they aren’t. There simply isn’t a valid base of knowledge about
the natural history of cancer development in humans to permit a valid judgment
to be made about the meaning of particular signs or indicators or histological
structures. The extensive use of mammograms has increased the diagnosis of
“ductal carcinoma in situ” by more than 1000% (a 16- or 18-fold increase in
some hospitals, and expected to double in the next decade), increasing the
number of mastectomies and other treatments, but the increased treatments and
early diagnosis haven’t produced any visible change in the death rate. The
pathologists talk knowingly of “pre-neoplastic” conditions that indicate an
increased risk of malignancy, but instead of data, what they have is an
ideology about the nature of cancer. When they say that a growth pattern is
premalignant or that a cell has a malignant structure, they might as well be
talking about goblins, because the scientific basis for what they are saying
is nothing but a belief in the ideology that cancer is “clonal,” that a
particular cancer derives from a single defective cell. They are so self-
assured, and have so many sources to cite about the “clonal nature of cancer,”
that it seems impolite to suggest that they might simply be misusing language
and logic. Isn’t a person derived from a single cell, and so, in that sense,
“clonal”? As organs differentiate in the development of the organism, can’t
organs be traced back to the cells from which they developed? Isn’t every
tissue “a clone” in that sense? What is it that makes the “clonal” nature of
cancer tissue so special? Isn’t it just that a nasty, mean, malignant tissue
is, mentally, traced back to a “malignant” cell, by analogy with the way good
tissues are traced back to good cells? If the tumor is odious, it must derive
from an odious cell, and what could make that cell so hateful if it is
genetically identical to the good cells? Therefore, the goblin reasoning goes,
a genetic mutation must have produced the evil cell. The actual evidence is
that there are broad changes in tissues preceding the appearance of cancer.
The goblin theory explains this by saying that a multitude of “precancerous”
mutations occurred before the mutant cancer cell appeared. Harry Rubin has
carefully shown experimentally and logically that cancer precedes the genetic
changes that occur in tumors. But the ideology that cancer is the result of a
genetic mutation forces its devotees to say that the genetic changes that can
be found in a mature tumor must have occurred in one cell that was previously
not malignant. An effect is identified as a cause. The clonal-goblin theory of
cancer leads logically to the conclusion that the cancer clone must be
exorcised by surgery, chemotherapy, and/or radiation. The biological theory of
cancer, on the other hand, is inclined to view the normal and abnormal
development of cells in terms of the cells’ responses to conditions. Estrogen
and ionizing radiation are the most clearly documented causes of breast
cancer. Their excitatory effects lead to inflammation, edema, fibrosis, and
interruption of intercellular regulatory processes. Radiation is estrogenic,
and increased estrogenic stimulation produces growth and temporary loss of
differentiated functions. Estrogen and radiation aren’t the only things that
can cause these systematic changes in the structure of tissues--for example,
vitamin A deficiencies, hypothyroidism, chlorinated hydrocarbons, irritation,
and lack of oxygen can cause similar changes--but estrogen and irradiation
have been studied enough to give us a fairly distinct picture of the real
processes involved in the development of cancer. Polyunsaturated fats are
another clearly identified cause of cancer, especially breast cancer. These
fats synergize with estrogen, and sensitize to radiation. Their effects on the
mother can be seen in the offspring, as an increased tendency to develop
breast or prostate cancer. An individual’s hormone balance can be disrupted by
exposure to radiation, estrogens, or unsaturated fats. The hormonal balance of
the parent is imprinted upon the offspring, acting on the chromosomes, the
liver, brain, genitals, pituitary, bones--in fact, the prenatal imprint can
probably be found everywhere in the offspring. It’s easy to reduce our
exposure to radiation, by avoiding mammograms, bone density scans, and other
x-rays of all sorts. Ultrasound and MRI can produce good images of any tissue
without the deadly effects of ionizing radiation. Polyunsaturated fats can be
reduced by careful selection of foods, but the food industry is finding ways
to contaminate traditionally safe foods, such as beef and milk, by using new
kinds of animal feed. Still, milk, cheese, beef, and lamb are safe,
considering their high nutritional content, and the remarkable purification
that occurs in the rumen of cows, sheep, and goats. Some studies suggest a
protective effect from saturated fat (Chajes, et al., 1999.) Estrogenic
influences can be significantly reduced by avoiding foods such as soy products
and unsaturated fats, by eating enough protein to optimize the liver’s
elimination of estrogen, and by using things such as bulk-forming foods (raw
carrots, potatoes, and milk, for example) that stimulate bowel action and
prevent reabsorption of estrogens from the intestine. Avoiding hypothyroidism
is essential for preventing chronic retention or formation of too much
estrogen. Some studies show that dietary starch, rather than fat, is
associated with breast cancer. Starch strongly stimulates insulin secretion,
and insulin stimulates the formation of estrogen. Estrogen is formed in fat
cells under the influence of cortisol, and this formation is suppressed by
progesterone and thyroid. Postmenopausal obesity is associated with increased
estrogen and breast cancer. The prevention of weight gain, and supplementation
with thyroid and progesterone if necessary, should be protective against many
types of cancer, especially breast, kidney, and uterine cancer. Prenatal or
early life exposure to estrogens, including phytoestrogens, or to irradiation,
or to polyunsaturated oils, increases the incidence of mammary cancers in
adulthood. Protein deficiency prenatally or early in life causes a life-long
excess of serotonin. Feeding an excess of tryptophan, the precursor of
serotonin, during pregnancy produces pituitary and mammary tumors in the
offspring. Serotonin, besides being closely associated with the effects of
estrogen (e.g., mediating its stimulation of prolactin secretion) and
polyunsaturated fats, can be metabolized into carcinogens. Prenatal protein
deficiency and excess unsaturated oils predispose to a developmental pattern
involving hypothyroidism and hyperestrogenism; puberty occurs at an earlier
age, along with a tendency to gain weight. Inflammatory processes (e.g.,
“autoimmune diseases”) are usually intensified under those conditions.
Inflammation itself increases the effects of estrogen and serotonin. Both
preventively and therapeutically, the use of the antiinflammatory and
antioxidative substances such as aspirin, caffeine, progesterone, and thyroid
hormone would seem appropriate. Aspirin is coming to be widely accepted as an
anticancer agent, and at moderate doses can cause cancer cells to die. It,
like progesterone and thyroid, has a wide variety of anti-estrogenic effects.
Especially when a tumor is painfully inflamed, aspirin’s effects can be quick
and dramatic. However, people aren’t likely to be pleased if their cancer
doctor tells them to “take aspirin and call me in six months.” Aspirin’s
reputation for causing stomach bleeding causes people to avoid it, even when
the alternative is something that’s seriously toxic to other organs, and it
might just seem too ordinary to be considered as a powerful anticancer drug.
Because of the toxic (carcinogenic, and anti-respiratory) effects of the
“essential fatty acids,” which are usually stored in the tissues in very large
quantities, it’s important to avoid the stresses or hunger that would release
the fats into the blood stream. Estrogens and adrenalin and serotonin and
growth hormone, and prolonged darkness, increase the release of the free fatty
acids. Frequent meals, including some saturated fats such as coconut oil, and
a balance of protein, sugars, and salts, will minimize the release of stored
fats. The population trends toward greater obesity and earlier puberty, both
of which are associated with a higher risk of breast cancer, suggest that the
war against cancer is far from over. In the 19th century when the incidence of
breast cancer was much lower than it is now, puberty usually occurred around
the age of 17. In countries with a low incidence of breast cancer, puberty
still occurs in the middle to late teens. People who are now 100 generally had
puberty years later than girls do now. The biological changes now seen in
children in the U.S. suggest that the incidence of degenerative diseases of
all sorts is likely to increase as these children grow up. A metabolic
approach to the prevention and treatment of cancer would have many beneficial
side effects, such as producing generally healthier, happier and brighter
babies. REFERENCES Radiat Res 1998 Sep;150(3):330-48 Mortality in beagles
irradiated during prenatal and postnatal development. II. Contribution of
benign and malignant neoplasia. Benjamin SA, Lee AC, Angleton GM, Saunders WJ,
Keefe TJ, Mallinckrodt CH. To evaluate the lifetime carcinogenic hazards of
exposure to ionizing radiation during development, 1,680 beagles received
whole-body exposures to 60Co gamma rays or sham exposures. Eight groups of 120
dogs each received mean doses of 15.6-17.5 or 80.8-88.3 cGy in early, mid- or
late gestation, at 8, 28 or 55 days postcoitus or at 2 days after birth.
Another group of 120 dogs received a mean dose of 82.6 cGy as 70-day-old
juveniles and one group of 240 dogs received a mean dose of 81.2 cGy as
365-day-old young adults. Sham irradiations were given to 360 controls. Sexes
were equally represented. In 1,343 dogs allowed to live out their life span,
neoplasia was a major disease, contributing to mortality in 40% of the dogs.
There was a significant increase in benign and malignant neoplasms occurring
in young dogs (<4 years old), including fatal malignancies, after irradiation
in the perinatal (late fetal and neonatal) periods. The lifetime incidence of
fatal neoplasms was also increased in dogs irradiated perinatally. Three
malignancies-lymphomas, hemangiosarcomas and mammary carcinomas-accounted for
51% of all fatal tumors. There was an apparent lifetime increase and earlier
onset of lymphomas in dogs exposed as fetuses. Fatal hemangiosarcomas were
increased in dogs irradiated early and late in gestation. Fatal mammary
carcinomas were not increased by irradiation, although non-fatal carcinomas
were increased after perinatal exposure. Myeloproliferative disorders and
central nervous system astrocytomas appeared to be increased in perinatally
irradiated dogs. These data suggest that irradiation in both the fetal and
neonatal periods is associated with increased early onset and lifetime cancer
risk. Int J Cancer 1999 Nov 26;83(5):585-90. Fatty-acid composition in serum
phospholipids and risk of breast cancer: an incident case-control study in
Sweden. Chajes V, Hulten K, Van Kappel AL, Winkvist A, Kaaks R, Hallmans G,
Lenner P, Riboli E. “. . . women in the highest quartile of stearic acid had a
relative risk of 0.49 (95% confidence interval, 0.22-1.08) compared with women
in the lowest quartile (trend p = 0.047), suggesting a protective role of
stearic acid in breast-cancer risk.” Tumori 2000 Jan-Feb;86(1):12-6 Factors of
risk for breast cancer influencing post-menopausal long-term hormone
replacement therapy. Chiechi LM, Secreto G. “. . . growing evidence points to
increased breast cancer risk in HRT long-term users, and the adverse effect
would, obviously, overwhelm any other benefit. At present, the risk/benefit
ratio of HRT is an object of hot debate . . . .” “We conclude that some
biologic and clinical markers, namely android obesity, bone density,
mammographic density, androgen and estrogen circulating levels, alcohol
consumption, benign breast disease, and familiarity, should be carefully
considered before prescribing long-term HRT. Our analysis suggests that HRT
could increase the risk of breast cancer and useless in preventing coronary
heart disease and osteoporotic fractures when administered in women with
positivity for one or more of these markers.” Cancer 1996 Nov
15;78(10):2045-8. Declining cancer mortality in the United States. Cole P,
Rodu B. Preventing Breast Cancer:The story of a Major, Proven, Preventable
Cause of This Disease. John W. Gofman, M.D., Ph.D. 1996. “This book uncovers
the major cause of the recent breast-cancer incidence in the USA. The author
shows that past exposure to ionizing radiation --- primarily medical x-rays
--- is responsible for about 75 percent of the breast-cancer problem in the
United States. The good news: Since the radiation dosage given today by
medical procedures can be significantly reduced without interfering with a
single useful procedure, numerous future cases of breast-cancer can be
prevented. The author recommends specific actions to start breast-cancer
prevention now, not ten years from now.” Am J Public Health 1998
Mar;88(3):458-60. Geographic variations in breast cancer mortality: do higher
rates imply elevated incidence or poorer survival? Goodwin JS, Freeman JL,
Freeman D, Nattinger AB. “Mortality rates from breast cancer are approximately
25% higher for women in the northeastern United States than for women in the
South or West. This study examined the hypothesis that the elevation is due to
decreased survival rather than increased incidence.” “The elevated mortality
in the Northeast is apparent only in older women. For women aged 65 years and
older, breast cancer mortality is 26% higher in New England than in the South,
while incidence is only 3% higher. Breast cancer mortality for older women by
state correlates poorly with incidence (r = 0.28). CONCLUSIONS: Those seeking
to explain the excess breast cancer mortality in the Northeast should assess
survival and should examine differences in cancer control practices that
affect survival.” Nutrition 1999 May;15(5):392-401 The influence of maternal
diet on breast cancer risk among female offspring. Hilakivi-Clarke L, Clarke
R, Lippman M. The induction of breast cancer is a long process, containing a
series of biological events that drive a normal mammary cell towards malignant
growth. However, it is not known when the initiation of breast cancer occurs.
One hypothesis is that a high estrogenic environment during the perinatal
period increases subsequent breast cancer risk. There are many sources of
extragonadal estrogens, particularly in the diet. The purpose of this paper is
to review the evidence that a high maternal intake of dietary fats increases
serum estrogens during pregnancy and increases breast cancer risk in
daughters. Our animal studies show that a high maternal consumption of corn
oil consisting mainly of linoleic acid (omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid,
PUFA), increases both circulating estradiol (E2) levels during pregnancy and
the risk of developing carcinogen-induced mammary tumors among the female rat
offspring. A similar increase in breast cancer risk occurs in female offspring
exposed to injections of E2 through their pregnant mother. Our data suggest
that the mechanisms by which an early exposure to dietary fat and/or estrogens
increases breast cancer risk is related to reduced differentiation of the
mammary epithelial tree and increased number of mammary epithelial cell
structures that are known to the sites of neoplastic transformation. These
findings may reflect our data of the reduced estrogen receptor protein levels
and protein kinase C activity in the developing mammary glands of female rats
exposed to a high-fat diet in utero. In summary, a high dietary linoleic acid
intake can elevate pregnancy estrogen levels and this, possibly by altering
mammary gland morphology and expression of fat- and/or estrogen-regulated
genes, can increase breast cancer risk in the offspring. If true for women,
breast cancer prevention in daughters may include modulating the mother's
pregnancy intake of some dietary fats. Mol Cell Biochem 1998 Nov;188(1-2):5-12
Timing of dietary fat exposure and mammary tumorigenesis: role of estrogen
receptor and protein kinase C activity. Hilakivi-Clarke L, Clarke R. The
possible association between a high fat diet and increased breast cancer risk
has remained controversial. This largely reflects the conflicting data
obtained from migrant, case control and animal studies, which generally
support this association, and cohort studies which often fail to show a link
between fat and breast cancer. The mammary gland is particularly sensitive to
estrogens during fetal development, leading us to hypothesize that dietary fat
levels during this period may significantly influence breast cancer risk.
Using chemically-induced mammary tumors in rats as our experimental model, we
have demonstrated the ability of a maternal diet, high in the polyunsaturated
fatty acid (PUFA) linoleic acid, to alter mammary gland differentiation,
accelerate the onset of sexual maturation, and increase breast cancer risk.
The mammary glands of female rats exposed to a high-fat diet in utero have
more of the undifferentiated structures (terminal end buds) and fewer of the
differentiated structures (alveolar buds) than the glands of rats exposed to a
low-fat diet in utero. Furthermore, these mammary glands contain lower levels
of total estrogen receptors and have reduced total protein kinase C activity.
These effects appear to be mediated by an increase in the serum estradiol
levels of pregnancy, which are elevated at least 30% in pregnant dams fed a
high-fat diet. Furthermore, the administration of estradiol to pregnant dams
produces effects on mammary gland development, onset of puberty and
sensitivity to chemical carcinogenesis comparable to those seen in the
offspring of rats fed a high fat diet during pregnancy. Our results, thus,
support the hypothesis based on epidemiological data that high maternal
estrogen levels increase daughters' breast cancer risk. The results also
suggest that a high-fat diet may be an important factor in increasing
pregnancy estrogenic activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 Aug
19;94(17):9372-7. A maternal diet high in n - 6 polyunsaturated fats alters
mammary gland development, puberty onset, and breast cancer risk among female
rat offspring. Hilakivi-Clarke L, Clarke R, Onojafe I, Raygada M, Cho E,
Lippman M. We hypothesized that feeding pregnant rats with a high-fat diet
would increase both circulating 17beta-estradiol (E2) levels in the dams and
the risk of developing carcinogen-induced mammary tumors among their female
offspring. Pregnant rats were fed isocaloric diets containing 12% or 16% (low
fat) or 43% or 46% (high fat) of calories from corn oil, which primarily
contains the n - 6 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) linoleic acid, throughout
pregnancy. The plasma concentrations of E2 were significantly higher in
pregnant females fed a high n - 6 PUFA diet. The female offspring of these
rats were fed with a laboratory chow from birth onward, and when exposed
to7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene had a significantly higher mammary tumor
incidence (60% vs. 30%) and shorter latency for tumor appearance (11.4 +/- 0.5
weeks vs. 14.2 +/- 0.6 weeks) than the offspring of the low-fat mothers. The
high-fat offspring also had puberty onset at a younger age, and their mammary
glands contained significantly higher numbers of the epithelial structures
that are the targets for malignant transformation. Comparable changes in
puberty onset, mammary gland morphology, and tumor incidence were observed in
the offspring of rats treated daily with 20 ng of E2 during pregnancy. These
data, if extrapolated to humans, may explain the link among diet, early
puberty onset, mammary parenchymal patterns, and breast cancer risk, and
indicate that an in utero exposure to a diet high in n - 6 PUFA and/or
estrogenic stimuli may be critical for affecting breast cancer risk. Oncol Rep
1998 May-Jun;5(3):609-16 Maternal genistein exposure mimics the effects of
estrogen on mammary gland development in female mouse offspring. Hilakivi-
Clarke L, Cho E, Clarke R. Human and animal data indicate that a high maternal
estrogen exposure during pregnancy increases breast cancer risk among
daughters. This may reflect an increase in the epithelial structures that are
the sites for malignant transformation, i.e., terminal end buds (TEBs), and a
reduction in epithelial differentiation in the mammary gland. Some
phytoestrogens, such as genistein which is a major component in soy-based
foods, and zearalenone, a mycotoxin found in agricultural products, have
estrogenic effects on the reproductive system, breast and brain. The present
study examined whether in utero exposure to genistein or zearalenone
influences mammary gland development. Pregnant mice were injected daily with
i) 20 ng estradiol (E2); ii) 20 microg genistein; iii) 2 microg zearalenone;
iv) 2 microg tamoxifen (TAM), a partial estrogen receptor agonist; or v) oil-
vehicle between days 15 and 20 of gestation. E2, genistein, zearalenone, and
tamoxifen all increased the density of TEBs in the mammary glands. Genistein
reduced, and zearalenone increased, epithelial differentiation. Zearalenone
also increased epithelial density, when compared with the vehicle-controls.
None of the treatments had permanent effects on circulating E2 levels.
Maternal exposure to E2 accelerated body weight gain, physical maturation
(eyelid opening), and puberty onset (vaginal opening) in the female offspring.
Genistein and tamoxifen had similar effects on puberty onset than E2.
Zearalenone caused persistent cornification of the estrus smears. These
findings indicate that maternal exposure to physiological doses of genistein
mimics the effects of E2 on the mammary gland and reproductive systems in the
offspring. Thus, our results suggest that genistein acts as an estrogen in
utero, and may increase the incidence of mammary tumors if given through a
pregnant mother. The estrogenic effects of zearalenone on the mammary gland,
in contrast, are probably counteracted by the permanent changes in estrus
cycling. Am J Public Health 1991 Apr;81(4):462-5 Does increased detection
account for the rising incidence of breast cancer? Liff JM, Sung JF, Chow WH,
Greenberg RS, Flanders WD. “The incidence of breast cancer has been increasing
over time in the United States.” “To determine the role of screening in this
increase, trends in the incidence of in situ and invasive carcinoma of the
breast were evaluated using records of the metropolitan Atlanta SEER program
between 1979 and 1986.” “The average annual age-adjusted incidence of invasive
disease rose 29 percent among Whites and 41 percent among Blacks. Incidence
increased in all age groups.” “Asymptomatic tumors accounted for only 40
percent of the increased incidence among whites and 25 percent of the
increased incidence among blacks, with mammography as the principal
contributing procedure.” “These data suggest that increased detection accounts
for some but not all of the rising incidence of breast cancer in the United
States.” J Clin Oncol 2001 Jan 1;19(1):239-41. The fifty-year decline of
cancer in america. Rodu B, Cole P. Department of Pathology, School of
Medicine, and the Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. PURPOSE: From 1950 to
1990, the overall cancer mortality rate increased steadily in the United
States, a trend which ran counter to declining mortality from other major
diseases. The purpose of this study was to assess the impact of lung cancer on
all-cancer mortality over the past 50 years. METHODS: Data from the National
Centers for Health Statistics were used to develop mortality rates for all
forms of cancer combined, lung cancer, and other-cancer (all-cancer minus lung
cancer) from 1950 to 1998. RESULTS: When lung cancer is excluded, mortality
from all other forms of cancer combined declined continuously from 1950 to
1998, dropping 25% during this period. The decline in other-cancer mortality
was approximately 0.4% annually from 1950 to 1990 but accelerated to 0.9% per
year from 1990 to 1996 and to 2.2% per year from 1996 to 1998.CONCLUSION: The
long-term decline is likely due primarily to improvements in medical care,
including screening, diagnosis, and treatment. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia
1998 Jan;3(1):49-61 Role of hormones in mammary cancer initiation and
progression. Russo IH, Russo J. “Administration of carcinogen to pregnant,
parous or hormonally treated virgin rats, on the other hand, fails to elicit a
tumorigenic response, a phenomenon attributed to the higher degree of
differentiation of the mammary gland induced by the hormonal stimulation of
pregnancy. In women a majority of breast cancers that are initially hormone
dependent are manifested during the postmenopausal period. Estradiol plays a
crucial role in their development and evolution.” Hum Reprod 1999
Aug;14(8):2155-61 Tryptophan ingestion by pregnant rats induces pituitary and
mammary tumours in the adult female offspring. Santana C, Martin L, Valladares
F, Diaz-Flores L, Santana-Herrera C, Milena A, Rodriguez Diaz M “. . .
maternal ingestion of tryptophan induced a marked rise in 665-day-old
offspring in the incidence of both pituitary prolactinomas (62%) and mammary
adenomas (49%). Present data suggest that tryptophan regulates serotonergic
differentiation during early development. A transitory modification of the
tryptophan concentration in the fetal brain induces a permanent increase in
hypothalamic serotonin level and, in addition to modifying the release of
prolactin, increases the incidence of tumours in the hypophysis and mammary
gland.” JAMA 1977 Feb 21;237(8):789-90. Breast cancer induced by radiation.
Relation to mammography and treatment of acne. Simon N.This communication
reports cases of 16 women in whom cancer of the breast developed after
radiation therapy for acne or hirsutism, suggesting another group at higher
risk than is generally expected for cancer of the breast. It is prudent to
regard the carcinogenic effect of radiation on the breast as proportional to
dose without a threshold. Mammography in young women should be ordered only
selectively, not for screening. Rev Interam Radiol 1977 Oct;2(4):199-203.
Cancer of the breast--induction by radiation and role of mammography. Simon N.
Eur J Clin Nutr 1999 Feb;53(2):83-7. Western nutrition and the insulin
resistance syndrome: a link to breast cancer. Stoll BA. “The incidence of
breast cancer in the Western world runs parallel to that of the major
components of the insulin resistance syndrome--hyperinsulinaemia,
dyslipidaemia, hypertension and atherosclerosis. Evidence is reviewed that the
growth of breast cancer is favoured by specific dietary fatty acids, visceral
fat accumulation and inadequate physical exercise, all of which are thought to
interact in favouring the development of the insulin resistance syndrome.”
“Experimental evidence suggests that hyperinsulinaemia and its concomitants
can increase the promotion of mammary carcinogenesis and the mechanism is
likely to involve increased bioactivity of insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1). Case-control and cohort studies have shown that higher serum levels
of IGF-1 are associated with increased breast cancer risk.” “Nutritional and
lifestyle modifications that improve insulin sensitivity may not only decrease
a tendency to atherosclerosis but also reduce breast cancer risk in women.”
Strong, Leonell C, Biological Aspects of Cancer and Aging, Oxford, Pergamon
Press, 1968. Ethn Dis 1999 Spring-Summer;9(2):181-9. Secular trend of earlier
onset of menarche with increasing obesity in black and white girls: the
Bogalusa Heart Study. Wattigney WA, Srinivasan SR, Chen W, Greenlund KJ,
Berenson GS. “Secular trends in onset of menarche and obesity were examined 14
years apart in two biracial (black-white) cohorts of girls aged 8 to 17 under
study for cardiovascular risk. The first cohort (N=1,190, 64% white) was
examined in 1978-1979, the second (N=1,164, 57% white) in 1992-1994.” “The
onset of menarche occurred at an earlier age in the second cohort compared
with the first cohort (P<0.0001), both in black girls (11.4+/-1.3 vs
12.3+/-1.4 years) and white girls (11.5+/-1.3 vs 12.3+/-1.3 years).
Furthermore, twice as many girls in the second cohort had reached menarche by
ages younger than 12 years (P<0.001).” “Since increases in body fatness and
related early onset of menarche are risk factors for disorders in adult life
including cardiovascular disease and breast cancer, the secular trend in the
increasing incidence of obesity throughout the United States is becoming a
major public health problem.” ^^^ Top ^^^

