![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Caffeine: A vitamin-like nutrient, or adaptogen**

**Questions about tea and coffee, cancer and other degenerative diseases, and
the hormones.**

There is a popular health-culture that circulates mistaken ideas about
nutrition, and coffee drinking has been a perennial target of this culture. It
is commonly said that coffee is a drug, not a food, and that its drug action
is harmful, and that this harm is not compensated by any nutritional benefit.
Most physicians subscribe to most of these common sense ideas about coffee,
and form an authoritative barrier against the assimilation of scientific
information about coffee.

I think it would be good to reconsider coffees place in the diet and in
health care.

**Coffee drinkers have a lower incidence of thyroid disease, including cancer,
thannon-drinkers.**

**Caffeine protects the liver from alcohol and acetaminophen (Tylenol) and
other toxins, and coffee drinkers are less likely than people who dont use
coffee to have elevated serum enzymes and other indications of liver damage.**

**Caffeine protects against cancer caused by radiation, chemical carcinogens,
viruses, and estrogens.**

**Caffeine synergizes with progesterone, and increases its concentration in
blood and tissues.**

**Cystic breast disease is not caused by caffeine, in fact caffeines effects
are likely to be protective; a variety of studies show that coffee, tea, and
caffeine are protective against breast cancer.**

**Coffee provides very significant quantities of magnesium, as well as other
nutrients including vitamin B1.**

**Caffeine improves efficiency of fuel use and performance: JC Wagner
1989.**

**Coffee drinkers have a low incidence of suicide.**

**Caffeine supports serotonin uptake in nerves, and inhibits blood platelet
aggregation.**

**Coffee drinkers have been found to have lower cadmium in tissues; coffee
making removes heavy metals from water.**

**Coffee inhibits iron absorption if taken with meals, helping to prevent iron
overload.**

**Caffeine, like niacin, inhibits apoptosis, protecting against stress-induced
cell death, without interfering with normal cell turnover.**

**Caffeine can prevent nerve cell death.**

**Coffee (or caffeine) prevents Parkinsons Disease (Ross, et al., 2000).**

**The prenatal growth retardation that can be caused by feeding large amounts
of caffeine is prevented by supplementing the diet with sugar.**

**Caffeine stops production of free radicals by inhibiting xanthine oxidase,
an important factor in tissue stress.**

**Caffeine lowers serum potassium following exercise; stabilizes platelets,
reducing thromboxane production.**

One definition of a vitamin is that it is an organic chemical found in foods,
the lack of which **_causes_** a specific **_disease,_** or group of diseases.
A variety of substances that have been proposed to be vitamins havent been
recognized as being essential, and some substances that arent essential are
sometimes called vitamins. Sometimes these issues havent had enough
scientific investigation, but often nonscientific forces regulate nutritional
ideas.

The definition of a disease isnt as clear as text-book writers have
implied, and causality in biology is always more complex than we like to
believe.

Nutrition is one of the most important sciences, and should certainly be as
prestigious and well financed as astrophysics and nuclear physics, but while
people say it doesnt take a brain surgeon to figure that out, no one says
it doesnt take a nutritionist to understand that. Partly, thats because
medicine treated scientific nutrition as an illegitimate step-child, and
refused throughout the 20th century to recognize that it is a central part of
scientific health care. In the 1970s, physicians and dietitians were still
ridiculing the idea that vitamin E could prevent or cure diseases of the
circulatory system, and babies as well as older people were given total
intravenous nutrition which lacked nutrients that are essential to life,
growth, immunity, and healing. Medicine and science are powerfully
institutionalized, but no institution or profession has existed for the
purpose of encouraging people to act reasonably.

In this environment, most people have felt that subtleties of definition,
logic and evidence werent important for nutrition, and a great amount of
energy has gone into deciding whether there were four food groups or seven
food groups or a nutritional pyramid. The motives behind governmental and
quasi-governmental nutrition policies usually represent something besides a
simple scientific concern for good health, as when health care institutions
say that Mexican babies should begin eating beans when they reach the age of
six months, or that non-whites dont need milk after they are weaned. In a
culture that discourages prolonged breast feeding, the effects of these
doctrines can be serious.

After a century of scientific nutrition, public nutritional policies are doing
approximately as much harm as good, and they are getting worse faster than
they are getting better..

In this culture, what we desperately need is a recognition of the complexity
of life, and of the political-ecological situation we find ourselves in. Any
thinking which isnt system thinking should be treated with caution, and
most contemporary thinking about health neglects to consider relevant parts of
the problem-system. Official recommendations about salt, cholesterol, iron,
unsaturated and saturated fats, and soybeans have generally been
inappropriate, unscientific, and strongly motivated by business interests
rather than by biological knowledge.

Definitions have rarely distinguished clearly between nutrients and drugs, and
new commercial motives are helping to further blur the distinctions.

**Essential nutrients, defensive (detoxifying, antistress) nutrients, hormone-
modulating nutrients, self-actualization nutrients, growth regulating
nutrients, structure modifiers, life extension agents, transgenerationally
active (imprinting)** **nutrients--** the line between nutrients and
biological modifiers often depends on the situation. Vitamins D and A clearly
have hormone-like properties, and vitamin Es effects, and those of many
terpenoids and steroids and bioflavonoids found in foods, include hormone-like
actions as well as antioxidant and pro-oxidant functions. The concept of
adaptogen can include things that act like both drugs and nutrients.

Some studies have suggested that trace amounts of nutrients could be passed on
for a few generations, but the evidence now indicates that these
transgenerational effects are caused by phenomena such as imprinting. But
the hereditary effects of nutrients are so complex that their recognition
would force nutrition to be recognized as one of the most complex sciences,
interwoven with the complexities of growth and development.

The idea that poor nutrition stunts growth has led to the idea that good
nutrition can be defined in terms of the rate of growth and the size
ultimately reached. In medicine, it is common to refer to an obese specimen as
well nourished, as if quantity of food and quantity of tissue were
necessarily good things. But poisons can stimulate growth (hormesis), and
food restriction can extend longevity. **We still have to determine basic
things such as the optimal rate of growth, and the optimal size.**

Nutrition textbooks flatly describe caffeine as a drug, not a nutrient, as if
it were obvious that nutrients cant be drugs. Any of the essential nutrients,
if used in isolation, can be used as a drug, for a specific effect on the
organism that it wouldnt normally have when eaten as a component of ordinary
food. And natural foods contain thousands of chemicals, other than the
essential nutrients. Many of these are called nonessential nutrients, but
their importance is being recognized increasingly. The truth is that we arent
sure what they arent essential for. Until we have more definite knowledge
about the organism I dont think we should categorize things so absolutely as
drugs or nutrients.

The bad effects ascribed to coffee usually involve administering large doses
in a short period of time. While caffeine is commonly said to raise blood
pressure, this effect is slight, and may not occur during the normal use of
coffee. Experimenters typically ignore essential factors. Drinking plain water
can cause an extreme rise in blood pressure, especially in old people, and
eating a meal (containing carbohydrate) lowers blood pressure. The increased
metabolic rate caffeine produces increases the cellular consumption of
glucose, so experiments that study the effects of coffee taken on an empty
stomach are measuring the effects of increased temperature and metabolic rate,
combined with increased adrenaline (resulting from the decrease of glucose),
and so confuse the issue of caffeines intrinsic effects.

In one study (Krasilnikov, 1975), the drugs were introduced directly into the
carotid artery to study the effects on the blood vessels in the brain.
Caffeine increased the blood volume in the brain, while decreasing the
resistance of the vessels, and this effect is what would be expected from its
stimulation of brain metabolism and the consequent increase in carbon dioxide,
which dilates blood vessels.

In the whole body, increased carbon dioxide also decreases vascular
resistance, and this allows circulation to increase, while the hearts work is
decreased, relative to the amount of blood pumped. But when the whole bodys
metabolism is increased, adequate nutrition is crucial.

In animal experiments that have been used to argue that pregnant women
shouldnt drink coffee, large doses of caffeine given to pregnant animals
retarded the growth of the fetuses. But simply giving more sucrose prevented
the growth retardation. Since caffeine tends to correct some of the metabolic
problems that could interfere with pregnancy, it is possible that rationally
constructed experiments could show benefits to the fetus from the mothers use
of coffee, for example by lowering bilirubin and serotonin, preventing
hypoglycemia, increasing uterine perfusion and progesterone synthesis,
synergizing with thyroid and cortisol to promote lung maturation, and
providing additional nutrients.

One of the most popular misconceptions about caffeine is that it causes
fibrocystic breast disease. Several groups demonstrated pretty clearly that it
doesnt, but there was no reason that they should have had to bother, except
for an amazingly incompetent, but highly publicized, series of articles--
classics of their kind--by J. P. Minton, of Ohio State University. Minton
neglected to notice that the healthy breast contains a high percentage of fat,
and that the inflamed and diseased breast has an increased proportion of
glandular material Fat cells have a low level of cyclic AMP, a regulatory
substance that is associated with normal cellular differentiation and
function, and is involved in mediating caffeines ability to inhibit cancer
cell multiplication. Minton argued that cAMP increases progressively with the
degree of breast disease, up to cancer, and that cAMP is increased by
caffeine. A variety of substances other than caffeine that inhibit the growth
of cancer cells (as well as normal breast cells) act by _increasing_ the
amount of cyclic AMP, while estrogen lowers the amount of cAMP and increases
cell growth. Mintons argument should have been to use more caffeine, in
proportion to the degree of breast disease, if he were arguing logically from
his evidence. Caffeines effect on the breast resembles that of progesterone,
opposing estrogens effects.

Many studies over the last 30 years have shown caffeine to be highly
protective against all kinds of carcinogenesis, including estrogens
carcinogenic effects on the breast. Caffeine is now being used along with some
of the standard cancer treatments, to improve their effects or to reduce their
side effects. There are substances in the coffee berry besides caffeine that
protect against mutations and cancer, and that have shown strong therapeutic
effects against cancer. Although many plant substances are protective against
mutations and cancer, I dont know of any that is as free of side effects as
coffee.  

To talk about caffeine, its necessary to talk about uric acid. **Uric acid,
synthesized in the body, is both a stimulant and a very important antioxidant,
and its structure is very similar to that of caffeine.** A deficiency of uric
acid is a serious problem. Caffeine and uric acid are in the group of
chemicals called purines.

Purines (along with pyrimidines) are components of the nucleic acids, DNA and
RNA, but they have many other functions. In general, substances related to
purines are stimulants, and substances related to pyrimidines are sedatives.

When the basic purine structure is oxidized, it becomes in turn hypoxanthine,
xanthine, and uric acid, by the addition of oxygen atoms. When methyl groups
(CH3) are added to nitrogens in the purine ring, the molecule becomes less
water soluble. Xanthine (an intermediate in purine metabolism) has two oxygen
atoms, and when three methyl groups are added, it becomes trimethyl xanthine,
or caffeine. With two methyl groups, it is theophylline, which is named for
its presence in tea. We have enzyme systems which can add and subtract methyl
groups **;** for example, when babies are given theophylline, they can convert
it into caffeine.

We have enzymes that can modify all of the methyl groups and oxygen atoms of
caffeine and the other purine derivatives. Caffeine is usually excreted in a
modified form, for example as a methylated uric acid.

One of the ways in which uric acid functions as an antioxidant is by
modifying the activity of the enzyme xanthine oxidase, which in stress can
become a dangerous source of free radicals. Caffeine also restrains this
enzyme. There are several other ways in which uric acid and caffeine (and a
variety of intermediate xanthines) protect against oxidative damage. Coffee
drinkers, for example, have been found to have lower levels of cadmium in
their kidneys than people who dont use coffee, and coffee is known to inhibit
the absorption of iron by the intestine, helping to prevent iron overload.

Toxins and stressors often kill cells, for example in the brain, liver, and
immune system, by causing the cells to expend energy faster than it can be
replaced. There is an enzyme system that repairs genetic damage, called
PARP. The activation of this enzyme is a major energy drain, and substances
that inhibit it can prevent the death of the cell. Niacin and caffeine can
inhibit this enzyme sufficiently to prevent this characteristic kind of cell
death, without preventing the normal cellular turnover **;** that is, they
dont produce tumors by preventing the death of cells that arent needed.

The purines are important in a great variety of regulatory processes, and
caffeine fits into this complex system in other ways that are often protective
against stress. For example, it has been proposed that tea can protect against
circulatory disease by preventing abnormal clotting, and the mechanism seems
to be that caffeine (or theophylline) tends to restrain stress-induced
platelet aggregaton.

When platelets clump, they release various factors that contribute to the
development of a clot. Serotonin is one of these, and is released by other
kinds of cell, including mast cells and basophils and nerve cells. Serotonin
produces vascular spasms and increased blood pressure, blood vessel leakiness
and inflammation, and the release of many other stress mediators. Caffeine,
besides inhibiting the platelet aggregation, also tends to inhibit the release
of serotonin, or to promote its uptake and binding.

J. W. Davis, et al., 1996, found that high uric acid levels seem to protect
against the development of Parkinsons disease. They ascribed this effect to
uric acids antioxidant function. Coffee drinking, which _lowers_ uric acid
levels, nevertheless appeared to be much more strongly protective against
Parkinsons disease than uric acid.

Possibly more important than coffees ability to protect the health is the way
it does it. The studies that have tried to gather evidence to show that coffee
is harmful, and found the opposite, have provided insight into several
diseases. For example, coffees effects on serotonin are very similar to
carbon dioxides, and the thyroid hormones. Noticing that coffee drinking is
associated with a low incidence of Parkinsons disease could focus attention
on the ways that thyroid and carbon dioxide and serotonin, estrogen, mast
cells, histamine and blood clotting interact to produce nerve cell death.

Thinking about how caffeine can be beneficial across such a broad spectrum of
problems can give us a perspective on the similarities of their underlying
physiology and biochemistry, expanding the implications of stress, biological
energy, and adaptability.

The observation that coffee drinkers have a low incidence of suicide, for
example, might be physiologically related to the large increase in suicide
rate among people who use the newer antidepressants called serotonin reuptake
inhibitors. Serotonin excess causes several of the features of depression,
such as learned helplessness and reduced metabolic rate, while coffee
stimulates the _uptake_ (inactivation or storage) of serotonin, increases
metabolic energy, and tends to improve mood. In animal studies, it reverses
the state of helplessness or despair, often more effectively than so-called
antidepressants.  

The research on caffeines effects on blood pressure, and on the use of fuel
by the more actively metabolizing cells, hasnt clarified its effects on
respiration and nutrition, but some of these experiments confirm things that
coffee drinkers usually learn for themselves.

Often, a woman who thinks that she has symptoms of hypoglycemia says that
drinking even the smallest amount of coffee makes her anxious and shaky.
Sometimes, I have suggested that they try drinking about two ounces of coffee
with cream or milk along with a meal. Its common for them to find that this
reduces their symptoms of hypoglycemia, and allows them to be symptom-free
between meals. Although we dont know exactly why caffeine improves an
athletes endurance, I think the same processes are involved when coffee
increases a persons endurance in ordinary activities.

Caffeine has remarkable parallels to thyroid and progesterone, and the use of
coffee or tea can help to maintain their production, or compensate for their
deficiency. Women spontaneously drink more coffee premenstrually, and since
caffeine is known to increase the concentration of progesterone in the blood
and in the brain, this is obviously a spontaneous and rational form of self-
medication, though medical editors like to see things causally reversed, and
blame the coffee drinking for the symptoms it is actually alleviating. Some
women have noticed that the effect of a progesterone supplement is stronger
when they take it with coffee. This is similar to the synergy between thyroid
and progesterone, which is probably involved, since caffeine tends to
_locally_ activate thyroid secretion by a variety of mechanisms, increasing
cyclic AMP and decreasing serotonin in thyroid cells, for example, and also by
lowering the systemic stress mediators.

Medical editors like to publish articles that reinforce important prejudices,
even if, scientifically, they are trash. The momentum of a bad idea can
probably be measured by the tons of glossy paper that have gone into its
development. Just for the sake of the environment, it would be nice if editors
would try to think in terms of evidence and biological mechanisms, rather than
stereotypes.  

**REFERENCES**  

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova 1975 Oct;61(10):1531-8. **[Changes in the
resistance and capacity of the cerebral vascular bed under the influence of
vasoactive substances].** [Article in Russian] Krasil'nikov, V.G. Effects of
intracarotid injections of vasoactive agents on cerebrovascular resistance
(CVR) and cerebral blood volume (CBV) were studied in hemodynamically isolated
brain of cats. Perfusion pressure shifts at a constant blood volume perfusion
reflected CVR changes, and changes of venous outflow \- CBV alterations.
Administration of adrenaline, serotonin, and angiotensine was followed mainly
by an increase of CVR and a decrease of CBV. The **CVR** **could be reduced by
isopropilnoradrenaline, acetylcholine, histamine, and caffeine.** **CBV was
decreased after isopropilnoradrenaline, acetycholine, histamine injections and
increased by caffeine.** The possible role of the active changes of cerebral
capacitance vessels in the transcapillary fluid exchange is discussed.
Capacitance vessels active responses are supposed to entail wrong results when
using certain techniques for measurement of cerebral blood flow and
metabolism.

Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1999 Apr;220(4):244-8. **The prevention of lung cancer
induced by a tobacco-specific carcinogen in rodents by green and black Tea.**
Chung FL The oxidation products found in black tea, thearubigins and
theaflavins, also possess antioxidant activity, suggesting that black tea may
also inhibit NNK-induced lung tumorigenesis. Indeed, bioassays in A/J mice
have shown that black tea given as drinking water retarded the development of
lung cancer caused by NNK. We conducted a 2-year lifetime bioassay in F344
rats to determine **whether black tea and caffeine are protective against lung
tumorigenesis induced by NNK. Our studies in both mice and rats have generated
important new data that support green and black tea and** **caffeine as
potential preventive agents against lung cancer, suggesting that a closer
examination of the roles of tea and caffeine on lung cancer** in smokers may
be warranted.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2000 May;66(1):39-45. **Caffeine-induced increases in
the brain and plasma concentrations of neuroactive steroids in the rat.**
Concas A, Porcu P, Sogliano C, Serra M, Purdy RH, Biggio G. A single
intraperitoneal injection of caffeine induced dose- and time-dependent
increases in the concentrations of pregnenolone, progesterone, and 3alpha-
hydroxy-5alpha-pregnan-20-one (allopregnanolone) in the cerebral cortex.
Caffeine also increased the plasma **concentrations of pregnenolone and
progesterone with a dose-response relation similar to that observed in the
brain . . .** Moreover, the brain and plasma concentrations of pregnenolone,
progesterone, and allopregnanolone were not affected by caffeine in
adrenalectomized-orchiectomized rats.

Cancer Res 1998 Sep 15;58(18):4096-101. **Inhibition of** **lung
carcinogenesis by black tea in Fischer rats treated with a tobacco-specific
carcinogen: caffeine as an important constituent.** Chung FL, Wang M, Rivenson
A, Iatropoulos MJ, Reinhardt JC, Pittman B, Ho CT, Amin SG. The NNK-treated
group, given 2% black tea, showed a significant reduction of the **total lung
tumor (adenomas, adenocarcinomas, and adenosquamous carcinomas) incidence from
47% to 19%, whereas the group given 1% and 0.5% black tea showed no change.
The 2% tea also reduced liver tumor incidence** induced by NNK from 34% in the
group given only deionized water to 12%. **The most unexpected finding was
the remarkable reduction of the lung tumor incidence, from 47% to 10%, in the
group treated with 680 ppm caffeine, a concentration equivalent to that found
in the 2% tea. This incidence is comparable to background** levels seen in the
control group. This study demonstrated for the first time in a 2-year lifetime
bioassay that black tea protects against lung tumorigenesis in F344 rats,
**and this effect appears to be attributed, to a significant extent, to
caffeine as an active ingredient of tea.**

Cancer Lett 1991 Mar;56(3):245-50. **Inhibition by caffeine of ovarian
hormone-induced mammary gland tumorigenesis in female GR mice.** VanderPloeg
LC, Welsch CW. Hormone treatment induced mammary tumors in 95-100% of the
mice. Caffeine treatment significantly (P less than 0.05) reduced the mean
number of mammary tumors per mouse and significantly (P less than 0.05)
increased the mean latency period of mammary tumor appearance.

Breast Cancer Res Treat 1991 Nov;19(3):269-75. **Caffeine inhibits development
of benign mammary gland tumors in carcinogen-treated female Sprague-Dawley
rats.** Wolfrom DM, Rao AR, Welsch CW.

Cancer 1985 Oct 15;56(8):1977-81. **The inhibitory effect of caffeine on
hormone-induced rat breast cancer.** Petrek JA, Sandberg WA, Cole MN,
Silberman MS, Collins DC. The current investigation examines the effect of
two caffeine doses in ACI rats with and without diethylstilbestrol (DES).
Without DES, cancer did not develop in any of the rats receiving either of the
two caffeine dosages. With DES, increasing caffeine dosage lengthened the time
to first cancer, decreased the number of rats that developed cancers, and
decreased the number of cancers overall. In conclusion, chronic caffeine
ingestion inhibits rat breast cancer, neither by interfering with the high
prolactin levels--a necessary step in murine tumor development--nor by causing
hypocaloric intake.

Nutr Cancer 1998;30(1):21-4. **Association of coffee, green tea, and caffeine
intakes with serum concentrations of estradiol and sex hormone-binding
globulin in premenopausal Japanese women.** Nagata C, Kabuto M, Shimizu H.
Although the **effect of caffeine cannot be distinguished from effects of
coffee and green tea, consumption of caffeine-containing beverages appeared to
favorably alter hormone levels associated with the risk of developing breast
cancer.**

J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1992; 11(3):177-89. **Caffeine, theophylline,
theobromine, and developmental growth of the mouse mammary gland.**
VanderPloeg LC, Wolfrom DM, Rao AR, Braselton WE, Welsch CW. **These data
demonstrate that certain methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine and theophylline) but
not others (e.g., theobromine) can significantly enhance mammotrophic hormone-
induced mammary lobulo-alveolar differentiation** in female Balb/c mice, an
effect that appears not to be manifested via a direct action of the
methylxanthines on the mammary gland.

J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1994;13(2):81-8. **Enhancement by caffeine of
mammary gland lobulo-alveolar development in mice: a function of increased
corticosterone.** Welsch CW, VanderPloeg LC. Previously we have reported that
the stimulatory effect of caffeine on **lobulo-alveolar development** in the
mammary glands of female Balb/c mice is not due to a direct action of the drug
on the mammary gland but appears to be due to a caffeine-induced alteration of
a yet to be defined systemic physiological process (VanderPloeg et al., J
Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 11:177-189, 1992). In the present study, we
administered caffeine (via the drinking water, 500 mg/L) to ovariectomized,
estrogen- and progesterone-treated Balb/c mice. After 30 days of caffeine
treatment, a significant (p < 0.001) enhancement of lobulo-alveolar
development in the mammary glands of the hormone-treated mice, compared with
hormone treated control mice, was observed.

Am J Clin Nutr 1997 Jun;65(6):1826-30. **Dietary caffeine intake and bone
status of postmenopausal women.** Lloyd T, Rollings N, Eggli DF, Kieselhorst
K, Chinchilli VM.

Eur J Epidemiol 1993 May;9(3):293-7. **Unexpected effects of coffee
consumption on liver enzymes.** Casiglia E, Spolaore P, Ginocchio G, Ambrosio
GB. Istituto di Medicina Clinica, Universita di Padova, Italy. The effects of
regular daily coffee consumption on liver enzymes were studied in a large
number of subjects from the general population. In coffee drinkers, liver
enzymes (gamma-glutamyl transferase, alanine-amino transferase, and alkaline
phosphatase) and serum bilirubin were lower than in non-coffee-drinking
subjects or in those consuming less than 3 cups daily. The hypothesis proposed
is that liver enzymes are a target for caffeine contained in coffee.

Anticancer Res 1996 Jan-Feb;16(1):151-3 **Suppression by coffee cherry of the
growth of spontaneous mammary tumours in SHN mice.** Nagasawa H, Yasuda M,
Sakamoto S, Inatomi H Experimental Animal Research Laboratory, Meiji
University, Kanagawa, Japan. We previously found that coffee cherry (CC),
residue after removal of coffee beans, significantly suppressed the
development of spontaneous mammary tumours of mice. In this paper, the effects
of CC on the growth of the palpable size of this type of tumour was examined.
Free access as drinking **water of 0.5% solution of the hot water extract of
CC for 10 days resulted in a marked inhibition of the tumour growth: The
percent changes of tumour sizes were 53.8 +/- 11.7% and 13.8 +/- 10.9% in
the** control and the experimental groups, respectively. Associated with this,
thymidylate synthetase activity in the mammary tumours was significantly lower
in the experimental group than in the control. Normal and preneoplastic
mammary gland growth, body weight change and weights and structures of
endocrine organs were only slightly affected by the treatment. The findings
indicate that CC is promising as an antitumour agent.

Yakugaku Zasshi 1997 Jul;117(7):448-54. **[Effect of tea extracts, catechin
and caffeine against type-I allergic reaction].** [Article in Japanese]
Shiozaki T, Sugiyama K, Nakazato K, Takeo T. **Caffeine also showed a
inhibitory effect on the PCA reaction. These results indicate that tea could
provide a significant protection against the type-I allergic reaction. These
findings also suggest that tea catechins and caffeine play an important role
in having an inhibitory effect on the type-I allergic reaction.**

Acta Chir Scand 1989 Jun-Jul;155(6-7):317-20. **Does coffee consumption
protect against thyroid disease?** Linos A, Linos DA, Vgotza N, Souvatzoglou
A, Koutras DA

Br J Nutr 1999 Aug;82(2):125-30. **Inverse association between coffee drinking
and serum uric acid concentrations in middle-aged Japanese males.** Kiyohara
C, Kono S, Honjo S, Todoroki I, Sakurai Y, Nishiwaki M, Hamada H, Nishikawa H,
Koga H, Ogawa S, Nakagawa K

Cancer Res 1997 Jul 1;57(13):2623-9. **Effects of tea, decaffeinated tea, and
caffeine on UVB light-induced complete carcinogenesis in SKH-1 mice:
demonstration of caffeine as a biologically important constituent of tea**.
Huang MT, Xie JG, Wang ZY, Ho CT, Lou YR, Wang CX, Hard GC, Conney A.H.

Mutat Res 1981 Jun;89(2):161-77. **Non-mutagenicity of urine from coffee
drinkers compared with that from cigarette smokers.** Aeschbacher HU, Chappuis
C.

Biol Neonate 1981;40(3-4):196-8. **The effects of maternal carbohydrate
(sucrose) supplementation on the growth of offspring of pregnancies with
habitual caffeine consumption.** Dunlop M, Court JM, Larkins RG. When
maternal caffeine (10 mg/kg/day) was consumed together with supplementary
sucrose (7 g/kg/day) the expected offspring growth reduction attributed to
caffeine did not occur.

Biochim Biophys Acta 1992 Dec 15;1175(1):114-22. **Caffeine promotes survival
of cultured sympathetic neurons deprived of nerve growth factor through a
cAMP-dependent mechanism.** Tanaka S, Koike T.

JAMA 2000 May 24-31;283(20):2674-9. **Association of coffee and caffeine
intake with the risk of Parkinson disease.** Ross GW, Abbott RD, Petrovitch H,
Morens DM, Grandinetti A, Tung KH, Tanner CM, Masaki KH, Blanchette PL, Curb
JD, Popper JS, White LR.

Farmakol Toksikol 1983 Sep-Oct;46(5):107-11 **[Use of the swimming test for
demonstrating antidepressive activity of drugs during single and repeated
administration].** [Article in Russian] Rusakov DIu, Val'dman AV. **The use
of the "swimming test" made it possible to identify the activity of tricyclic
(desipramine, chlorimipramine, amitryptyline) and atypical antidepressants
(befuralin, zimelidine, trazodon), that of pyrazidol (type A MAO inhibitor)
and of a number** of new compounds--derivatives of benzofuran and morpholine
upon single and chronic administration. To define the method specificity, use
was made of the neuroleptic haloperidol, the tranquilizer diazepam, and of
nembutal, which did not exhibit any activity in the test in question.
**Psychostimulants (amphetamine, caffeine) dramatically increased the time of
active swimming. The effect lasted throughout all the 30 minutes of testing,
which is not characteristic for antidepressants.**

Gen Pharmacol 1996 Jan;27(1):167-70 **The influence of antagonists of
poly(ADP-ribose) metabolism on acetaminophen hepatotoxicity.** Kroger H,
Ehrlich W, Klewer M, Gratz R, Dietrich A, Miesel R.

Ann Clin Lab Sci 1977 Jan-Feb;7(1):68-72. **Effects of drugs on platelet
function.** Morse EE.

Thromb Haemost 1982 Apr 30;47(2):90-5. **Effect of cAMP phosphodiesterase
inhibitors on ADP-induced shape change, cAMP and nucleoside diphosphokinase
activity of rabbit platelets.** Lam SC, Guccione MA, Packham MA, Mustard JF.

Carcinogenesis 1998 Aug;19(8):1369-75. **The coffee-specific diterpenes
cafestol and kahweol protect against aflatoxin B1-induced genotoxicity through
a dual mechanism.** Cavin C, Holzhauser D, Constable A, Huggett AC, Schilter
B.

Am J Epidemiol 1994 Apr 1;139(7):723-7. **Coffee and serum gamma-
glutamyltransferase: a study of self-defense officials in Japan.** Kono S,
Shinchi K, Imanishi K, Todoroki I, Hatsuse K.

Carcinogenesis 1996 Nov;17(11):2377-84 **Placental glutathione S-transferase
(GST-P) induction as a potential mechanism for the anti-carcinogenic effect of
the coffee-specific components cafestol and kahweol**. Schilter B, Perrin I,
Cavin C, Huggett AC

J Nutr 1999 Jul;129(7):1361-7. **Teas and other beverages suppress
D-galactosamine-induced liver injury in rats.** Sugiyama K, He P, Wada S,
Saeki S

Nutr Cancer 1999;33(2):146-53. **Effects of oral administration of tea,**
**decaffeinated tea, and caffeine on the formation and growth of tumors in
high-risk SKH-1 mice previously treated** with ultraviolet B light. Lou YR, Lu
YP, Xie JG, Huang MT, Conney AH.

Ind Health 2000 Jan;38(1):99-102. **Effects of coffee consumption against the
development of liver dysfunction: a 4-year follow-up study of middle-aged
Japanese male office workers.** Nakanishi N, Nakamura K, Suzuki K, Tatara K.

Ind Health 2000 Jan;38(1):99-102. **Effects of coffee consumption against the
development of liver dysfunction: a 4-year follow-up study of middle-aged
Japanese male office workers.** Nakanishi N, Nakamura K, Suzuki K, Tatara K. .

Biochim Biophys Acta 1992 Dec 15; 1175(1):114-22. **Caffeine promotes survival
of cultured sympathetic neurons deprived of nerve growth factor through a
cAMP-dependent mechanism.** Tanaka S, Koike T.

Int J Epidemiol 1998 Jun;27(3):438-43. **Coffee consumption and decreased
serum gamma-glutamyltransferase and aminotransferase activities among male
alcohol drinkers.** Tanaka K, Tokunaga S, Kono S, Tokudome S, Akamatsu T,
Moriyama T, Zakouji H. **. . . recent epidemiological studies have suggested
unexpected, possibly beneficial effects of coffee against the occurrence of
alcoholic liver cirrhosis** and upon serum liver enzyme levels. Increased
coffee consumption was strongly and independently associated with decreased
GGT activity among males (P trend < 0.0001); the inverse association between
coffee and serum GGT was more evident among heavier alcohol consumers (P <
0.0001), and was absent among non-alcohol drinkers. Similar inverse
associations with coffee and interactions between coffee and alcohol intake
were observed for serum aspartate aminotransferase and alanine
aminotransferase. Intake of green tea, another popular source of caffeine in
Japan, did not materially influence the liver enzyme levels. CONCLUSIONS: Our
results suggest that coffee may inhibit the induction of GGT in the liver by
alcohol consumption, and may possibly protect against liver cell damage due to
alcohol.

Am J Hosp Pharm 1989 Oct;46(10):2059-67. **Abuse of drugs used to enhance
athletic performance.** Wagner JC.  

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

