![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Calcium and Disease: Hypertension, organ calcification, & shock, vs.
respiratory energy**  

_SOME CONTEXTS  
In biology and biochemistry, calcium is the substance most often studied, so
it is significant that researchers still speak of a calcium paradox.  
There are several such paradoxes: As bones lose calcium, the soft tissues
calcify; when less calcium is eaten, blood calcium may increase, along with
calcium in many organs and tissues; if an organ such as the heart is deprived
of calcium for a short time, its cells lose their ability to respond normally
to calcium, and instead they take up a large, toxic amount of calcium.  
Magnesium deficiency and calcium deficiency have some similar symptoms (such
as cramping), but magnesium is antagonistic to calcium in many systems. It is
the basic protective calcium blocker.  
Inflammation leads to excessive uptake of calcium by cells, and is a factor in
obesity, depression, and the degenerative diseases.  
Protein deficiency is an important cause of deranged calcium metabolism.
Vitamins K, E, and A are important in regulating calcium metabolism, and
preventing osteoporosis. Aspirin (with antiestrogenic and vitamin E-like
actions) is protective against bone resorption and hypercalcemia.  
  
_ ============================  
It is extremely important to realize that calcium deposits in soft tissues
become worse when the diet is _low in calcium._ Persons suffering from
arthritis, bursitis, scleroderma, hardening of the arteries and any
abnormality where calcium deposits or spurs may cause pain are often afraid to
eat foods rich in calcium. Actually they can never improve until their calcium
and magnesium intakes are adequate. Not infrequently physicians tell
individuals with kidney stones to avoid all milk, thereby causing stones to
form even more rapidly. Such calcium deposits can also occur when vitamin E is
undersupplied. After open-heart surgery, when both magnesium and vitamin E are
drastically needed and could easily be given, the calcification of heart
muscles often becomes so severe that it can cause death within a few days.
Pages 171-172, _Lets Eat Right to Keep Fit,_ Adelle Davis, Signet, 1970.  
  
============================  
  
Almost all biologists think of the organism as a machine, regulated by
information according to innate programs. When it comes down to the details,
their explanations sometimes make Rube Goldbergs imaginary contraptions seem
elegant. At their best, they usually rely on some mysterious things called
ionic pumps, that perform active transport, powered by little motors, under
instructions from molecules that act on their specific receptors. When things
get unmanageable, the biologists speak of paradoxes.  
Calcium is the most studied of all regulatory molecules, so it isnt surprising
that there is more than one calcium paradox. But there are ways of looking at
the organism, focusing on energy metabolism, that dont involve the _ad hoc_
theory of calcium pumps, and that make it easy to keep things in context.  
Ionized atoms and molecules behave in orderly ways, in relation to their size
and their electrical charge. Organic material, even when its dead, selectively
binds certain metal ions, and excludes others. The living organism produces a
stream of metabolic products, such as carbon dioxide or lactic acid, which
interact specifically with each other and with the metal ions, modifying their
concentrations inside cells and in the body fluids. This movement of ions can
be called active transport, without invoking the mysterious machinery of
membrane pumps. Chemical changes produced inside cells, for example by
respiration, create different electrical charges in different compartments
(inside and outside of capillaries, for example) which affect the movements of
water and ions, by simple physical processes, not by molecular pumps.  
The result of these passive and active processes is that each kind of ion has
a characteristic concentration in each compartment, according to the metabolic
energy state of the organism.  
Magnesium and potassium are mainly intracellular ions, sodium and calcium are
mainly extracellular ions. When cells are excited, stressed, or de-energized,
they lose magnesium and potassium, and take up sodium and calcium. The
mitochondria can bind a certain amount of calcium during stress, but
accumulating calcium can reach a point at which it inactivates the
mitochondria, forcing cells to increase their inefficient glycolytic energy
production, producing an excess of lactic acid. Abnormal calcification begins
in the mitochondria.  
When cells are stressed or dying, they take up calcium, which tends to excite
the cells at the same time that it inhibits their energy production,
intensifying their stress. A cramp or a seizure is an example of uncontrolled
cellular excitation. Prolonged excitation and stress contribute to tissue
inflammation and fibrosis.  
Gross calcification generally follows the fibrosis that is produced by
inflammation.  
Arteries, kidneys, and other organs calcify during aging. At the age of 90,
the amount of calcium in the elastic layer of an artery is about 35 times
greater than at the age of 20. Nearly every type of tissue, including the
brain, is susceptible to the inflammatory process that leads through fibrosis
to calcification. The exception is the skeleton, which loses its calcium as
the soft tissues absorb calcium.  
These observations lead to some simplifying ideas about the nature of aging
and disease.  
Some people who know about the involvement of calcium in aging, stress, and
degeneration suggest eating a low calcium diet, but since we all have
skeletons, dietary calcium restriction cant protect our cells, and in fact, it
usually intensifies the process of calcification of the soft tissues.
Statistics from several countries have clearly shown that the mortality rate
(especially from arteriosclerotic heart disease, but also from some other
diseases, including cancer) is lower than average in regions that have hard
water, which often contains a very large amount of either calcium or
magnesium.  
Many studies have shown that dietary calcium (or vitamin D, which increases
calcium absorption) can have very important antiinflammatory effects.  
About 25 years ago, David McCarron noticed that the governments data on diet
and hypertension showed that the people who ate the most salt had the lowest
blood pressure, and those who ate the least salt had the highest pressure. He
showed that a calcium deficiency, rather than a sodium excess, was the most
likely nutritional explanation for hypertension.  
Hans Selye found that some steroids contribute to inflammation and
calcification. Animals could be sensitized to develop calciphylaxis, an
intense, localized interaction of inflammation and calcification.  
In the 1970s, Constance Martin pointed out that, up to that time, estrogen was
known to increase soft tissue calcium, but hadnt been shown to improve bone
calcification and strength.  
Oxygen deprivation, cyanide poisoning, x-irradiation, and all other sorts of
injury also increase the calcium content of soft tissues.  
One of Selyes colleagues, G. Jasmin, showed that magnesium deficiency causes
inflammation. A deficiency of either calcium or magnesium can stimulate the
parathyroid glands to produce more hormone (parathyroid hormone, PTH), which
increases calcium absorption, but also removes calcium from the bones. This
hormone, responding to a dietary calcium or magnesium deficiency, is an
important factor in causing cells to take up too much calcium, and its excess
is associated with many inflammatory and degenerative diseases.  
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), an inflammatory cytokine which increases with aging, is
commonly considered to have an important role in the multiple processes of
atrophy in old age. One of the things which can increase the production of
IL-6 is the parathyroid hormone (PTH), which increases the amount of calcium
circulating in the blood, partly by causing it to be removed from the bones;
IL-6 stimulates the process of calcium removal from bones.  
Some of the interactions of hormones and other regulatory chemicals are
interesting, even though they are normally treated as if they were parts of a
machine that operates according to a hidden program written in the genes.
Prolactin, which is increased under the influence of estrogen or serotonin,
causes the body to lose calcium (drawing it from the bones), and it stimulates
the secretion of PTH, which compensates for the calcium loss by increasing its
mobilization from bones. Prolactins action on bone is at least partly by
increasing IL-6 formation; IL-6 stimulates the release of prolactin. Serotonin
and IL-6 stimulate each others secretion, and PTH and serotonin each stimulate
the others release..  
PTH (like estrogen and serotonin) inhibits cellular respiration and activates
glycolysis, lowering the ATP level and shifting the cells metabolism toward
the production of lactic acid rather than carbon dioxide. PTH also causes
bicarbonate to be lost in the urine.  
Since the formation of carbon dioxide lowers the intracellular pH, and the
formation of lactic acid raises it (through the reaction of NADH with
pyruvate), the proteins in the cell become more strongly negatively charged
under the influence of oxygen deprivation, or under the influence of these
hormones. In the cell with high pH and increased negative electrical charge,
the positively charged calcium ion is absorbed into the cytoplasm. The calcium
can enter from the relatively concentrated external fluid, but it can also be
released from acidic intracellular stores, the way serotonin is released by a
disturbance of pH.  
There are several other pro-inflammatory substances, such as the cytokines,
that have a similar effect on cellular energy systems.  
The antimetabolic actions of PTH mimic those seen in aging and diabetes, and
surgical removal of the parathyroid glands has been known to eliminate
diabetes. PTH can cause diuresis, leading to loss of blood volume and
dehydration, hypertension, paralysis, increased rate of cell division, and
growth of cartilage, bone, and other tissues.  
Simply eating an adequate amount of calcium and magnesium can alleviate many
problems related to stress and aging that are considered serious, such as
heart arrhythmia, pancreatitis, and tissue calcification. The
antiinflammatory, anti-allergy actions of calcium and magnesium are well
established, and there is clear evidence that obesity and various emotional
disturbances can result from their deficiency. Chronically high PTH can
produce anemia, by a variety of mechanisms.  
Since a very low sodium diet increases the loss of magnesium, by increasing
aldosterone synthesis, simply increasing the amount of sodium in the diet can
help some people to balance their minerals and minimize stress. During fasting
and other intense stress, the kidneys destroy a large amount of protein to
form ammonia to maintain their ability to excrete acids, so using a large
amount of the alkaline minerals can reduce the protein catabolism.  
A diet of milk and fruit, or milk and meat, provides a nutritional balance
with generous amounts of calcium and magnesium. Leafy vegetables are a very
rich source of magnesium, but they are also a potential source of large
amounts of lead and other toxins. In 1960, many people, including the
U.S.government, were advocating the use of a largely vegetarian diet for
children, because of the amount of radioactive strontium in milk. I compared
the amount of strontium in a diet of vegetables that would provide the
necessary quantity of calcium and protein, and it was clear that vegetables
were the worst source of radioactive strontium, because their ratio of
strontium to calcium was much higher than the ratio in milk. The cows were
concentrating calcium and protein from the contaminated plant foods,
eliminating much of the strontium. This principle still applies to the toxins
that are currently found in the U.S. food supply.  
Milk has many protective effects besides providing calcium.  
Many babies are being given milk substitutes (health food drinks) made from
soy or rice, with terrible consequences. The same products used by adults have
less disastrous effects in the short term, but are still likely to contribute
to degeneration and dementia.  
Much of the intracellular magnesium is complexed with ATP, and helps to
stabilize that molecule. If cellular energy production is low, as in
hypothyroidism, cells tend to lose their magnesium very easily, shifting the
balance toward the lower energy molecule, ADP, with the release of phosphate.
ADP complexes with calcium, rather than magnesium, increasing the cells
calcium content.  
Increased intracellular calcium, in association with excess nitric oxide and
excitatory amino acids, is involved in several neurodegenerative diseases,
including ALS, Alzheimers disease, Parkinsons disease, Huntingtons chorea, and
epilepsy. Magnesium, nicotine, progesterone, and many other substances are
known to protect against excitotoxic calcium overload, but there is no
coherent effort in the health professions to make rational use of the
available knowledge.  
Respiration and carbon dioxide are the basic antagonists of the PTH. At birth,
a baby has practically no PTH, probably because of the high intrauterine
concentration of carbon dioxide, but within a few days the PTH rises.  
Increased carbon dioxide favors bone formation, and decreased bicarbonate
favors the loss of calcium from bone (Canzanello, et al., 1995; Bushinsky, et
al, 2001). The use of sodium bicarbonate can stimulate bone formation.  
A low protein diet, similar to that eaten by a large proportion of women (0.8
g/kg of body weight) increases PTH, and so probably contributes to the
development of osteoporosis and the diseases of calcification. In an extreme
protein deficiency, there is a shift towards inflammation, serotonin excess,
and excessive clotting, which might be related to the effect of the milder,
more common protein deficiency. Many people advocate a low protein diet,
specifically to prevent or treat osteoporosis, but the cultures that
traditionally have had extremely high protein diets, such as the Masai, are
very healthy. Recent studies (see Bell and Whiting, 2002) are emphasizing the
importance of animal protein in preventing osteoporosis.  
Traditional meat-eating cultures efficiently use the whole animal, including
blood, skin, bones, and the various organs, rather than just the muscles. That
diet is favorable for calcium regulation, because it provides more vitamin A,
D, E, and K, calcium, and gelatin, and less of the pro-inflammatory amino
acids, tryptophan and cysteine.  
Most loss of calcium from bones occurs during the night. PTH tends to cycle
with prolactin, which increases during the night, along with cortisol and the
other stress hormones. These nocturnal hormones probably account for the
morning stiffness seen in many rheumatic conditions, connective tissue
diseases, and in aging.  
Progesterone, which increases the carbon dioxide content of the tissues, is
remarkably able to inhibit the actions of most of the inflammatory and
catabolic mediators, and to protect against degenerative calcification and
osteoporosis. It also protects against abnormal clotting. PTH increases
platelet calcium concentration, and under some conditions can produce
inappropriate coagulation.  
Aspirin inhibits the actions of PTH, helping to prevent the calcification of
inflamed tissues, and it inhibits the loss of calcium from bones. Aspirin
decreases the release of IL-6.  
A protein called the PTH-related protein (PTHrP) has the same functions as
PTH, but can be produced in any tissue. It is responsible for the
hypercalcemia of cancer, and is apparently involved in the frequent metastasis
of breast cancer to the bones.  
With only a small change in the theory of the nature of a living organism,
recognizing the importance of the interactions of metabolites and structural
substances, controlled by energetic metabolism, real progress could be made in
understanding disease and health. The most important calcium paradox is that
medical journals (e.g., _International J. of Cardiology,_ Dec., 2002) are
still promoting the idea that eating too much calcium causes hardening of the
arteries and other diseases of calcification.  
  
REFERENCES

**J Am Soc Nephrol 1994 Apr;4(10):1814-9. A role of parathyroid hormone for
the activation of cardiac fibroblasts in Uremia.** Amann K, Ritz E, Wiest G,
Klaus G, Mall G. Thus, PTX abolished and PTH restored intermyocardiocytic
changes of experimental uremia. These observations argue for a permissive role
of PTH for fibroblast activation and the genesis of the cardiac fibrosis of
uremia.  

Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1976 May;5(3):291-3. Recurrent hormone dependent chorea:
effects of oestrogens and progestogens. Barber PV, Arnold AG, Evans G.  

Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001 Feb 23;281(2):277-81. **17 beta-estradiol
increases Ca(2+) influx and down regulates interleukin-2 receptor in mouse
thymocytes.** Azenabor AA, Hoffman-Goetz L.

Nutr Rev 2002 Oct;60(10 Pt 1):337-41. Elderly women need dietary protein to
maintain bone mass. Bell J, Whiting SJ. Researchers who conducted a recent
prospective study of older adults reported that animal protein had a
protective role for bone, especially in elderly women, whereas plant protein
was negatively associated with bone mineral density. Other studies confirm the
beneficial effect of increasing dietary protein intake in older women to
reduce bone mineral density loss and risk of fracture, suggesting that
emphasis should be placed on promoting adequate protein intake in elderly
women.  

Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2001 Dec;281(6):F1058-66. Metabolic, but not
respiratory, acidosis increases bone PGE(2) levels and calcium release.
Bushinsky DA, Parker WR, Alexander KM, Krieger NS. A decrease in blood pH may
be due to either a reduction in bicarbonate concentration ([HCO(3)(-)];
metabolic acidosis) or to an increase in PCO(2) (respiratory acidosis). In
mammals, metabolic, but not respiratory, acidosis increases urine calcium
excretion without altering intestinal calcium absorption, indicating that the
additional urinary calcium is derived from bone. In cultured bone, chronic
metabolic, but not respiratory, acidosis increases net calcium efflux (J(Ca)),
decreases osteoblastic collagen synthesis, and increases osteoclastic bone
resorption. Metabolic acidosis increases bone PGE(2) production, which is
correlated with J(Ca), and inhibition of PGE(2) production inhibits this acid-
induced J(Ca). Thus metabolic, but not respiratory, acidosis induces the
release of bone PGE(2), which mediates J(Ca) from bone.  

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991 Jan;72(1):69-76. Circadian variation in ionized
calcium and intact parathyroid hormone: evidence for sex differences in
calcium homeostasis. Calvo MS, Eastell R, Offord KP, Bergstralh EJ, Burritt
MF. Serum intact PTH levels showed a significant circadian pattern in both
sexes (P less than or equal to 0.001).  

J Lab Clin Med 1995 Jul;126(1):81-7. Effect of chronic respiratory acidosis on
calcium metabolism in the rat. Canzanello VJ, Kraut JA, Holick MF, Johns C,
Liu CC, Madias NE. Chronic metabolic acidosis typically results in
hypercalciuria and negative calcium balance. The impact of chronic respiratory
acidosis on calcium metabolism has been less well studied. To address this
issue, metabolic balance and static bone histomorphometric data were obtained
during a 14-day exposure of rats to 10% CO2 (blood pH 7.33, PaCO2 83 mm Hg)
and were compared with pair-fed controls. All rats were fed a 0.8% calcium
diet. Urinary calcium excretion (mg/period, mean +/- SEM) was increased during
both week 1 and week 2 (16 +/- 3 vs 9 +/- 1 and 16 +/- 2 vs 9 +/- 1, CO2 group
vs controls, respectively [p < 0.05]). Net intestinal calcium absorption
(intake minus fecal excretion) was increased throughout the period of
hypercapnia (week 1, 213 +/- 19 mg vs 135 +/- 15 mg; week 2, 135 +/- 16 mg vs
43 +/- 14 mg; and cumulatively, 344 +/- 27 mg vs 178 +/- 20 mg, CO2 group vs
controls [p < 0.01]). As a consequence of the marked increment in intestinal
calcium absorption during hypercapnia, mean net calcium balance was more
positive than that of controls throughout the study (week 1, 197 +/- 18 mg vs
126 +/- 15 mg; week 2, 120 +/- 15 mg vs 34 +/- 15 mg; and cumulatively, 317
+/- 25 mg vs 159 +/- 20 mg, CO2 group vs controls, respectively [p < 0.01]).
There were no significant differences in calcium intake, plasma total calcium,
immunoreactive parathyroid hormone, 25-hydroxyvitamin D, or creatinine
clearance between the two groups.  

Mov Disord 1991;6(4):355-7. An unusual cause of recurrent chorea. Caviness JN,
Muenter MD. Lee Silverman  

Bone 2000 Jan;26(1):79-85. **Correlation of estradiol, parathyroid hormone,
interleukin-6, and soluble interleukin-6 receptor during the normal menstrual
cycle.** Chiu KM, Arnaud CD, Ju J, Mayes D, Bacchetti P, Weitz S, Keller ET.
**Furthermore, IL-6 correlated positively with serum Ca over the entire cycle
(p = 0.0091. Serum Ca correlated positively with serum (p = 0.040) and urine
(p = 0.006) Dpd. PTH was significantly higher during the FP than in the LP**
(p = 0.004). **These data demonstrate that IL-6 and PTH fluctuate with E2, and
serum II-6 is associated with PTH levels during the menstrual cycle.**

J Cell Sci 2002 Feb 1;115(Pt 3):599-607. pH-dependent regulation of lysosomal
calcium in macrophages. Christensen KA, Myers JT, Swanson JA. Average free
calcium concentration in macrophage lysosomes was 4-6x10(-4) M, less than half
of the extracellular calcium concentration, but much higher than cytosolic
calcium levels. pH-dependent reductions of lysosomal calcium concentrations
appeared to result from calcium movement out of lysosomes into cytoplasm,
since increases in cytosolic calcium levels could be detected upon lysosome
alkalinization.  

Adv Neurol 1979;26:123-33. Ovarian steroid hormones and cerebral function.
Cogen PH, Zimmerman EA.  

J Bone Miner Res 1996 Oct;11(10):1419-29. Stimulation of neonatal mouse
calvarial bone resorption by the glucocorticoids hydrocortisone and
dexamethasone. Conaway HH, Grigorie D, Lerner UH. In vitro stimulation of bone
resorption was observed with the glucocorticoids hydrocortisone and
dexamethasone. The 45Ca release stimulated by 1 microM hydrocortisone and 0.1
microM dexamethasone was also inhibited by 10 microM progesterone in a
competitive manner and by 1 microM of the antiglucocorticoid RU38486, both of
which are modulators of glucocorticoid binding.  

J Physiol 2002 Mar 15;539(Pt 3):791-803. MgATP counteracts intracellular
proton inhibition of the sodium-calcium exchanger in dialysed squid axons.
DiPolo R, Beauge L. The increase in Ca(2+)(i) affinity induced by ATP at acid
pH (6.9) can be mimicked by a rise in pH(i) from 6.9 to 7.3 in the absence of
the nucleotide.  

J Maine Med Assoc 1977 Oct;68(10):370-1 Quadriparesis as an unusual
manifestation of hypercalcemia. Dyro FM.  

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992 Mar;74(3):487-94. Abnormalities in circadian
patterns of bone resorption and renal calcium conservation in type I
osteoporosis. Eastell R, Calvo MS, Burritt MF, Offord KP, Russell RG, Riggs
BL. The serum osteocalcin concentration, a sensitive index of bone formation,
increased by about 5% at night in both groups. Urinary deoxypyridinoline
excretion, a sensitive index of bone resorption, increased by 48% at night (P
less than 0.01) in the normal women, whereas in the osteoporotic women it was
62% higher overall (P less than 0.05), and the increase persisted into the
morning. The serum ionized calcium concentration did not change at night in
either group. There was a trend (P = 0.07) for blunting of the nocturnal
increase in the serum intact PTH level in osteoporotic women. Thus, the
nocturnal serum ionized calcium level is maintained by decreased urinary
calcium excretion and increased bone resorption in postmenopausal normal
women, but almost entirely by increased resorption in postmenopausal
osteoporotic women.  

Hypertension 1986 Jun;8(6):497-505. Effects of calcium infusion on blood
pressure in hypertensive and normotensive humans. Ellison DH, Shneidman R,
Morris C, McCarron DA. Together, these data provide evidence for interactions
between dietary sodium intake and the cardiovascular response to calcium. They
confirm that hypertensive subjects exhibit enhanced parathyroid gland function
even when dietary factors are controlled, and they suggest that these subjects
are more sensitive to the cardiovascular effects of short-term calcium
infusion.  

Yale J Biol Med 1996 Sep-Dec;68(5-6):215-7. Diplopia associated with
hyperparathyroidism: report of a case. Forman BH, Ciardiello K, Landau SJ,
Freedman JK. A patient with hypercalcemia due to primary hyperparathyroidism
presented with diplopia that resolved with surgical removal of his parathyroid
adenoma and normalization of his serum calcium values. No previous report of
this feature of hyperparathyroidism has been reported.  

J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo) 1985 Dec;31 Suppl:S15-9. **Aging and calcium as
an environmental factor.** Fujita T Calcium deficiency is a constant menace to
land-abiding animals, including mammals. Humans enjoying exceptional longevity
on earth are especially susceptible to calcium deficiency in old age. Low
calcium and vitamin D intake, short solar exposure, decreased intestinal
absorption, and falling renal function with insufficient 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D
biosynthesis all contribute to calcium deficiency, secondary
hyperparathyroidism, bone loss and possibly calcium shift from the bone to
soft tissue, and from the extracellular to the intracellular compartment,
blunting the sharp concentration gap between these compartments. The
consequences of calcium deficiency might thus include not only osteoporosis,
but also arteriosclerosis and hypertension due to the increase of calcium in
the vascular wall, **amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and senile dementia due to
calcium deposition** in the central nervous system, **and a decrease in
cellular function, because of blunting of the difference in extracellular-
intracellular calcium, leading to diabetes mellitus, immune deficiency and
others (Fig. 6)**

Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;587:371-5. Cytokines and osteoporosis. Fujita T, Matsui
T, Nakao Y, Shiozawa S, Imai Y. Conditions associated with immune dysfunction
such as aging, corticosteroid therapy, and rheumatoid arthritis are associated
with osteoporosis, which is also more common in females than in males, like
most of the autoimmune-collagen diseases. Peripheral lymphocyte subsets
CD4/CD8 were higher in patients with senile osteoporosis than in the age-
matched controls, and returned to normal after 1 month of 1 alpha(OH)vitamin
D3 treatment. Plasma interferon reflecting macrophage function decreased with
advance in age and increased in response to 1 alpha(OH)D3 treatment. As one of
the immunoregulators, vitamin D tends to stimulate the macrophage-natural
killer system and suppress the lymphocyte system, stimulating TGF beta and TNF
alpha activity. Senile osteoporosis of low turnover thus appears to be
associated with vitamin D deficiency, low macrophage function, high CD4
lymphocyte proportion, low IL-1 and high IL-2 activity, low IFN alpha and high
IFN gamma activity, and low TGF beta and TNF alpha activity.  

Contrib Nephrol 1991;90:206-11. **Calcium, parathyroids and aging.** Fujita T
Calcium is unique in its distribution in living organisms with an extremely
high hard and soft tissue and extra- intracellular concentration gradient.
Calcium **deficiency through stimulating parathyroid hormone secretion tends
to blunt such a difference by paradoxically increasing the calcium
concentration in the soft tissue and intracellular compartment. Since aging is
associated with the** progressive aggravation of calcium deficiency, such
blunting also progresses with aging. The dysfunction, damage and death of
cells occurring in all diseases **is always associated with a blunting of the
extra- and intracellular calcium components. Calcium supplement especially
with highly biologically available active absorbable calcium, was associated
with the suppression of parathyroid** hormone secretion and the normalization
of a such blunting **of intercompartmental distribution of calcium examples in
hypertension and diabetes mellitus with evident improvement of clinical
manifestations and laboratory tests.**

Presse Med 2001 Apr 7;30(13):653-8. [Hypovitaminosis D: a major worldwide
public health problem] Gannage-Yared MH, Tohme A, Halaby G. Mild to moderate
hypovitaminosis D causes secondary hyperparathyroidism increasing the risk of
fracture, particularly femoral neck fracture. Vitamin D would also have an
antiinflammatory and anticancer effect. Hypovitaminosis D is frequently
observed in Europe in the elderly, particularly in the institutionalized
population, but is also seen in otherwise healthy younger adults. An estimated
40% of the young European population has some degree of hypovitaminosis D.
Finally, the beneficial effect of moderate sun exposure on cutaneous vitamin D
synthesis (and psychological well-being) must not be overlooked.  

Mol Med 1996 Mar;2(2):204-10. **Parathyroid hormone-related protein is induced
during lethal endotoxemia and contributes to endotoxin-induced mortality in
rodents.** Funk JL, Moser AH, Strewler GJ, Feingold KR, Grunfeld C.
Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is a ubiquitous and highly
conserved vasoactive peptide whose role and regulation in normal physiology
remain an enigma. Recently, we demonstrated that low-dose endotoxin (LPS)
induces intrasplenic, but not systemic, levels of PTHrP; and that tumor
necrosis factor, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, is the major mediator of this
effect. We have therefore hypothesized that, with higher, lethal doses of
endotoxin, PTHrP could be induced in multiple tissues to such a degree that it
could contribute to the lethality of septic shock. In response to a near-
lethal dose of endotoxin, PTHrP mRNA levels increased acutely in every vital
organ examined (spleen, lung, heart, kidney, and liver). Circulating levels of
PTHrP also increased, peaking 2 hr after administration of high-dose
endotoxin. These **results suggest that PTHrP belongs to the cascade of pro-
inflammatory cytokines induced during lethal endotoxemia that is responsible
for the toxic effects of** LPS.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998 Feb;83(2):326-32. Serum soluble interleukin-6
receptor and biochemical markers of bone metabolism show significant
variations during the menstrual cycle. Gorai I, Taguchi Y, Chaki O, Kikuchi R,
Nakayama M, Yang BC, Yokota S, Minaguchi H. Serum soluble interleukin-6
receptor (sIL-6R) showed a significant variation; a rise during the early and
late follicular periods followed by a fall during the early luteal period (P =
0.0423, P = 0.0334) and an increase during the mid and late luteal periods.
The serum PTH level was significantly higher during the follicular than the
luteal period (P = 0.0132).  

Calcif Tissue Int 1990 May;46(5):294-9. Effective therapy of glucocorticoid-
induced osteoporosis with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Grecu EO, Weinshelbaum
A, Simmons R. The results lend support to the hypothesis of a progesterone-
glucocorticoid competitive antagonism at the bone level, though other
possibilities can be entertained, and suggest MPA as an effective therapy for
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis in men.  

Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1986 Mar;181(3):438-42. **Forskolin-induced bone
resorption in neonatal mouse calvaria in vitro.** Gunasekaran S, Hall GE,
Kenny AD **Lactic acid release was increased during the 96 hr of incubation in
proportion to the calcium release in the media.**  
  
J Endocrinol 2000 Feb;164(2):129-38. **Estrogen mediates the sex difference in
post-burn immunosuppression.** Gregory MS, Duffner LA, Faunce DE, Kovacs EJ.
Previous studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that cell-mediated immune
function was suppressed in female, but not male, mice at 10 days after burn
injury and was mediated, **in part, by increased production of interleukin-6
(IL-6).** Increased circulating **concentrations of E(2) corresponded with
suppressed delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) and splenocyte-proliferative
responses, and increased circulating concentrations of IL-6 in female mice
after burn. Ovariectomy** restored the suppressed DTH response and decreased
IL-6 concentrations, and administration of exogenous E(2) to both
ovariectomized females and intact male mice resulted in a suppressed DTH
response. In addition, in vitro **treatment with E(2) suppressed splenocyte
proliferation in a macrophage-dependent manner and enhanced macrophage
production of IL-6.**

Calcif Tissue Int 1990 May;46(5):294-9. Effective therapy of glucocorticoid-
induced osteoporosis with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Grecu EO, Weinshelbaum
A, Simmons R.  

Nephron 1982;30(3):237-9. Elevated thrombocyte calcium content in uremia and
its correction by 1 alpha(OH) vitamin D treatment. Gura V, Creter D, Levi J.

Fortschr Med 1985 Mar 28;103(12):328-30. **[Antiallergic effect of oral
calcium.** A clinico-experimental study] [Article in German] Haas PJ.
Randomized Controlled Trial

Acta Univ Carol Med Monogr 1972;53:427-32. The possible role of platelets as
trigger in intravascular coagulation associated with acute
hyperparathyroidism. Hilgard P, Hohage R, Schmitt W, Minne H, Ziegler R.  

Sci Total Environ 1986 Oct;54:207-16. Chemical qualities of water that
contribute to human health in a positive way. Hopps HC, Feder GL. The chemical
substances in water that make positive contributions to human health act
mainly in two ways: (i) nutritionally, by supplying essential macro and micro
elements that the diet (excluding water) may not provide in adequate amounts
(for example, Mg, I and Zn); and (ii) by providing macro and micro elements
that inhibit the absorbtion and/or effects of toxic elements such as Hg, Pb
and Cd. In this context, the inverse relationship between hard water and
cardiovascular disease will be discussed. Specific data relating hardness and
Mg and Ca content of potable waters to specific geographic regions of the
U.S.A. will be presented. These data show a strong positive correlation
between low Mg content and decreased longevity, and between high Ca and Mg
content and increased longevity. In the regions considered, increased
longevity correlates strongly with decreased cardiovascular mortality, and the
decreased longevity with increased cardiovascular mortality.  

Calcif Tissue Res 1977 Oct 20;23(3):241-4. **Proliferation of osteoclasts in
rat bone following bleeding and femoral fractures.** Johnell O, Hulth A This
rise in the osteoclast population might be due to an increased parathyroid
activity released by the trauma, but other factors may be involved. Both
bleedings and fractures in rats are followed by hypercalcemia.  
  
Brain Behav Immun 2000 Mar;14(1):49-61. **Modulation of IL-6 production during
the menstrual cycle in vivo and in vitro.** Konecna L, Yan MS, Miller LE,
Scholmerich J, Falk W, Straub RH. Premenopausal female patients with chronic
inflammatory diseases demonstrate changes in disease activity during the MC.
**DHEA decreased LPS-induced IL-6 secretion at six of seven time points during
the MC (DHEA, p = .047). In contrast, beta-estradiol and testosterone
increased LPS-induced IL-6 secretion in six of seven time points** during the
MC (significant for testosterone, p = .005). The study demonstrates
oscillation of serum IL-6 concentration during the MC and the marked MC-
dependent modulation of IL-6 secretion by sex hormones.  
  
Kidney Int Suppl 1983 Dec;16:S204-7. **Pathogenesis of the anemia of uremia:
role of secondary hyperparathyroidism.** Massry SG PTH may participate in the
genesis of the anemia of uremia through at least **three pathways. These
include inhibition of erythropoiesis, shortening survival of RBCs and inducing
fibrosis of bone marrow cavity.**

Braz J Med Biol Res 2002 Feb;35(2):229-36. Parathyroid hormone secretion in
chronic human endogenous hypercortisolism. Lanna CM, Paula FJ, Montenegro RM
Jr, Moreira AC, Foss MC. Osteoporosis is a common manifestation of Cushing's
syndrome, but the mechanisms responsible for this abnormality have not been
defined. Patients with CH showed an increased PTH response to the hypocalcemic
stimulus compared to controls.  

Am J Clin Nutr 2000 Jul;72(1):168-73. **A threshold for low-protein-diet-
induced elevations in parathyroid hormone.** Kerstetter JE, Svastisalee CM,
Caseria DM, Mitnick ME, Insogna KL. **Elevations in PTH developed by day 4 of
the diets containing 0.7 and 0.8 g protein/kg but not during the diets
containing 0.9 or 1.0 g protein/kg.** Our data suggest that in young healthy
women consuming a well-balanced diet, the current recommended dietary
allowance for protein (0.8 g/kg) results in short-term perturbations in
calcium homeostasis.

J Endocrinol 1995 Sep;146(3):421-9. Effect of oral calcium supplementation on
intracellular calcium and plasma renin in men. Lijnen P, Petrov V. Oral
calcium supplementation in these men was also accompanied by a reduction in
the plasma concentration of intact parathyroid hormone and
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, an increase in 24-h urinary calcium excretion but no
change in the plasma total Ca2+ concentration, serum ionized Ca2+ level and
plasma phosphate or 25-hydroxyvitamin D3.  

Clin Sci (Lond) 1996 Sep;91(3):313-8. Effects of mineral composition of
drinking water on risk for stone formation and bone metabolism in idiopathic
calcium nephrolithiasis. Marangella M, Vitale C, Petrarulo M, Rovera L, Dutto
F. The increase in overall calcium intake due to different drinking water
induced modest increases in calcium excretion, whereas oxalate excretion
tended to decrease. The changes in oxalate excretion during any one study
period compared with another were significantly related to those in calcium
intake. Citrate excretion was significantly higher with the high-calcium,
alkaline water. 4. Parathyroid hormone, calcitriol and markers of bone
resorption increased when patients were changed from the high-calcium,
alkaline to the low-calcium drinking water. 5. We suggest that overall calcium
intake may be tailored by supplying calcium in drinking water. Adverse effects
on bone turnover with low-calcium diets can be prevented by giving high-
calcium, alkaline drinking water, and the stone-forming risk can be decreased
as effectively as with low-calcium drinking water.  

J Endocrinol 1998 Feb;156(2):231-5. Calcium blood level modulates endogenous
nitric oxide action: effects of parathroidectomy in patients with
hyperparathyroidism. Martina V, Bruno GA, Brancaleoni V, Zumpano E, Tagliabue
M, Fornengo R, Gasparri G, Pescarmona GP. In primary hyperparathyroidism
(H-PTH) an increase in platelet free calcium levels is present. After surgery,
together with the normalization of calcium levels, NO production also returned
to normal values.  

Hypertension 1980 Mar-Apr;2(2):162-8. Enhanced parathyroid function in
essential hypertension: a homeostatic response to a urinary calcium leak.
McCarron DA, Pingree PA, Rubin RJ, Gaucher SM, Molitch M, Krutzik S. Recent
reports . . . suggest that increased parathyroid gland function may be one of
the more common endocrine disturbances associated with hypertension. Compared
to a second age- and sex-matched normotensive population, the hypertensives
demonstrated a significant (p less than 0.005) relative hypercalciuria. For
any level of urinary sodium, hypertensives excreted more calcium. These
preliminary data suggest that parathyroid gland function may be enhanced in
essential hypertension.  

Am J Med 1987 Jan 26;82(1B):27-33. The calcium paradox of essential
hypertension. McCarron DA, Morris CD, Bukoski R. Three disparate observations
--that calcium mediates vascular smooth muscle contraction, that calcium
channel blockers lower blood pressure, and that increased dietary calcium
intake can also ameliorate hypertension--constitute somewhat of a paradox.
This evidence, and the paradoxical therapeutic efficacy of both calcium
channel blockers and supplemental dietary calcium, can be integrated into a
single theoretic construct.  

Am J Hypertens 1995 Oct;8(10 Pt 1):957-64. Regulation of parathyroid hormone
and vitamin D in essential hypertension. Young EW, Morris CD, Holcomb S,
McMillan G, McCarron DA. The maximal stimulated PTH level was significantly
higher in hypertensive than normotensive subjects in the absence of measured
differences in serum ionized calcium concentration, serum 1,25(OH)2-vitamin D
concentration, and creatinine clearance.  

J Clin Invest 1995 Apr;95(4):1933-40. **The diurnal rhythm of bone resorption
in the rat. Effect of feeding habits and pharmacological inhibitors.**
Muhlbauer RC, Fleisch H. This paper shows that, in rats, bone mass can be
**increased by feeding habits per se. . . . we previously found a peak of bone
resorption following food administration. We now demonstrate that dividing the
solid and liquid intake into portions blunts this peak ....** Whether bone
mass in humans is also under the control of dietary habits is not known. **If
so, an increased meal frequency may be used to prevent osteoporosis.  
  
**Nephron 2001 Dec;89(4):384-90. **Prolonged dietary calcium restriction: a
diagnostic approach in idiopathic Hypercalciuria.** Muller D, Eggert P.

Scand J Urol Nephrol 1997 Jun;31(3):275-80. Serum magnesium concentration and
PTH levels. Is long-term chronic hypermagnesemia a risk factor for adynamic
bone disease? Navarro JF, Macia ML, Gallego E, Mendez ML, Chahin J, Garcia-
Nieto V, Garcia JJ. Interestingly, patients with low PTH had a significantly
higher serum Mg concentration than patients with adequate or high PTH (2.8 +/-
0.2 mg/dl vs 2.3 +/- 0.1 mg/dl and 2.2 +/- 0.1 mg/dl, respectively, p < 0.01).
Moreover, regression analysis showed a negative linear correlation between
serum PTH level and plasma Mg concentration (r = -0.6059, p < 0.001).  

J Appl Physiol 2001 Jun;90(6):2094-100. Effects of hypercapnia and hypocapnia
on [Ca2+]i mobilization in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells. Nishio K,
Suzuki Y, Takeshita K, Aoki T, Kudo H, Sato N, Naoki K, Miyao N, Ishii M,
Yamaguchi K. Hypocapnic alkalosis caused a fivefold increase in [Ca2+]i
compared with hypercapnic acidosis. The hypocapnia-evoked increase in [Ca2+]i
was decreased from 242 +/- 56 to 50 +/- 32 nmol/l by the removal of
extracellular Ca2+. The main mechanism affecting the hypocapnia-dependent
[Ca2+]i increase was thought to be the augmented influx of extracellular Ca2+
mediated by extracellular alkalosis. Hypercapnic acidosis caused little change
in PGI2 production, but hypocapnic alkalosis increased it markedly.  

Clin Nephrol 2002 Mar;57(3):183-91.. Bone involvement in idiopathic
hypercalciuria. Misael da Silva AM, dos Reis LM, Pereira RC, Futata E, Branco-
Martins CT, Noronha IL, Wajchemberg BL, Jorgetti V. A negative correlation was
observed between IL-6 levels and Z score of the femoral neck. Bone involvement
was detected in a young population with nephrolithiasis demonstrating that a
strict follow-up is necessary in order to control hypercalciuria.  

Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2002 Jul;283(1):H193-203. CaMKII-dependent
reactivation of SR Ca(2+) uptake and contractile recovery during intracellular
acidosis. Nomura N, Satoh H, Terada H, Matsunaga M, Watanabe H, Hayashi H. In
hearts, intracellular acidosis disturbs contractile performance by decreasing
myofibrillar Ca(2+) response, but contraction recovers at prolonged acidosis.  

J R Soc Health 1998 Apr;118(2):103-6. Lessons to be learned: a case study
approach. Primary hyperparathyroidism simulating an acute severe polyneuritis.
Olukoga A. The case is presented of a 65 year old lady with recent onset of
neuromuscular manifestations, comprising paraparesis, areflexia and unsteady
gait, along with episodes of slurring of speech and diplopia, later confirmed
to be due to severe hypercalcaemia--which itself was caused by primary
hyperparathyroidism.  

Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi 1989 May;26(3):216-22. **[Calcium and magnesium
metabolism in the aged]** [Article in Japanese] Ouchi Y, Orimo H Although
serum calcium concentration remains constant during ageing, the plasma
**concentration of calcium regulating hormones has been known to show dramatic
change with ageing. The plasma concentration of parathyroid hormone increases
with ageing, whereas plasma concentrations of calcitonin and active vitamin D
metabolite decrease with ageing.** On the other hand, the incidence of **soft
tissue calcification is known to increase with ageing.**

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1978 Sep;47(3):626-32. Calcium-regulating hormones
during the menstrual cycle. Pitkin RM, Reynolds WA, Williams GA, Hargis GK. In
six subjects with cycle lengths of 27-31 days, PTH levels rose progressively
through the follicular phase to a peak at or slightly before the LH surge,
then fell progressively through the luteal phase; peak PTH levels were 30-35%
above early follicular and late luteal values. One subject experienced a
prolonged (44 day) ovulatory cycle characterized by three distinct PTH peaks,
each of which coincided with elevations in plasma estradiol level.  

Muscle Nerve 1982 Jan;5(1):26-32. **Hereditary polymyopathy and cardiomyopathy
in the Syrian hamster. II. Development of heart necrotic changes in relation
to defective mitochondrial function.** Proschek L, Jasmin G **Since the
mitochondrial respiratory pattern and calcium overload parallel the cardiac
degeneration, it is inferred that the cell energy depletion is a functional
consequence of an abnormal calcium influx.**  
  
Eur J Endocrinol 1998 Oct;139(4):433-7. **Changes in cytochrome oxidase
activity in brown adipose tissue during oestrous cycle in the rat.** Puerta M,
Rocha M, Gonzalez-Covaleda S, McBennett SM, Andrews JF. **The involvement of
oestradiol in such a cycle is suggested by the fact that oestradiol treatment
decreased COX activity to values similar to those found in proestrus.**

Am J Hypertens 1999 Dec;12(12 Pt 1-2):1217-24. Modification of intracellular
calcium and plasma renin by dietary calcium in men. Petrov V, Lijnen P. Our
data show that the increase in PARA [plasma renin activity] observed in men
during oral calcium supplementation is accompanied by a reduction in the
intracellular free and total Ca2+ concentration in platelets and erythrocytes
and by a decrease in the plasma concentration of intact parathormone and
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3.  

Arthritis Rheum 2001 Oct;44(10):2338-41. **Association of osteoporosis and
cardiovascular disease in women with systemic lupus erythematosus.** Ramsey-
Goldman R, Manzi S. These results demonstrate an association between decreased
BMD and both an increased carotid plaque index and presence of coronary artery
calcification in a small cohort of young women with lupus.

Am J Hypertens 1994 Dec;7(12):1052-7. Dietary calcium reduces blood pressure,
parathyroid hormone, and platelet cytosolic calcium responses in spontaneously
hypertensive rats. Rao RM, Yan Y, Wu Y.  

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002. May;87(5):2008-12 Potassium citrate prevents
increased urine calcium excretion and bone resorption induced by a high sodium
chloride diet. Sellmeyer DE, Schloetter M, Sebastian A.  

J Allergy Clin Immunol 1990 Dec;86(6 Pt 1):881-5 **1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3
potentiates the decreased response of lymphocytes from atopic subjects to
agents that increase intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate.** Ravid A,
Tamir R, Liberman UA, Rotem C, Pick AI, Novogrodsky A, Koren R.  
  
Eur J Endocrinol 2002 May;146(5):635-42. **Diurnal rhythm of plasma
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and vitamin D-binding protein in postmenopausal women:
relationship to plasma parathyroid hormone and calcium and phosphate
metabolism.** Rejnmark L, Lauridsen AL, Vestergaard P, Heickendorff L,
Andreasen F, Mosekilde L. **With the disclosure of a diurnal rhythm of total
plasma 1,25(OH)(2)D, all major hormones and minerals related to calcium
homeostasis have now been shown to exhibit diurnal variations.**

Magnes Res 1999 Dec;12(4):257-67. Magnesium deficiency-induced osteoporosis in
the rat: uncoupling of bone formation and bone resorption. Rude RK, Kirchen
ME, Gruber HE, Meyer MH, Luck JS, Crawford DL. Magnesium (Mg) intake has been
linked to bone mass and/or rate of bone loss in humans. Experimental Mg
deficiency in animal models has resulted in impaired bone growth, osteopenia,
and increased skeletal fragility.  

Schweiz Med Wochenschr 1994 Jun 25;124(25):1122-8. **[Hypercalcemia]** Schmid
C. **Severe hypercalcemia is mainly caused by inappropriately high
concentrations of compounds which promote bone resorption, in particular PTH,
PTHrP, or 1,25 (OH)2D3. The major consequences are impaired central nervous
system and kidney function (polyuria/dehydration);** the latter, in turn,
aggravate hypercalcemia via decreased fluid intake, mobility, and renal
calcium clearance.

J Neurophysiol 2002 May;87(5):2209-24. Intracellular pH response to anoxia in
acutely dissociated adult rat hippocampal CA1 neurons. Sheldon C, Church J.
During perfusion with HCO/CO(2)- or HEPES-buffered media (pH 7.35) at 37
degrees C, 5- or 10-min anoxic insults were typified by an intracellular
acidification on the induction of anoxia, a subsequent rise in pH(i) in the
continued absence of O(2), and a further internal alkalinization on the return
to normoxia. Reducing extracellular pH from 7.35 to 6.60, or reducing ambient
temperature from 37 degrees C to room temperature, also attenuated the
increases in steady-state pH(i) observed during and after anoxia and reduced
rates of pH(i) recovery from acid loads imposed in the immediate postanoxic
period. The results suggest that a Zn(2+)-sensitive acid efflux mechanism,
possibly a H(+)-conductive pathway activated by membrane depolarization,
contributes to the internal alkalinization observed during anoxia in adult rat
CA1 neurons. The rise in pH(i) after anoxia reflects acid extrusion via the
H(+)-conductive pathway and also Na(+)/H(+) exchange, activation of the latter
being mediated, at least in part, through a cAMP-dependent signaling pathway.  

Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2002 Dec;283(6):H2518-26. pH-induced changes
in calcium: functional consequences and mechanisms of action in guinea pig
portal vein. Smith RD, Eisner DA, Wray S. The effects of changing
extracellular (pH(o)) and intracellular pH (pH(i)) on force and the mechanisms
involved in the guinea pig portal vein were investigated to better understand
the control of tone in this vessel. When pH(o) was altered, the effects on
force and calcium were the same irrespective of whether force had been
produced spontaneously by high-K depolarization or by norepinephrine;
alkalinization increased tone, and acidification reduced it. Because pH(o)
changes also lead to changes in pH(i), we determined whether the effects on
force could be explained by these induced pH(i) changes. It was found,
however, that only with spontaneous activity did intracellular alkalinization
increase force. In depolarized preparations, force was decreased, and, with
norepinephrine, force was initially decreased and then increased. Thus the
effects of pH(o) cannot be explained solely by changes in pH(i). The role of
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and surface membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase on the
mechanism were investigated and shown not to be involved. Therefore, it is
concluded that both pH(o) and pH(i) can have powerful modulatory effects on
portal vein tone, that these effects are not identical, and that they are
likely to be due to effects of pH on ion channels rather than the SR or plasma
membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase.  

Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002 May 10;293(3):974-8. Arachidonic acid
increases intracellular calcium in erythrocytes. Soldati L, Lombardi C, Adamo
D, Terranegra A, Bianchin C, Bianchi G, Vezzoli G.. Since arachidonic acid and
other polyunsaturated fatty acids influence the activities of most ion
channels, we studied their effects on the erythrocyte Ca(2+) influx. AA (5-50
microM) and EPA (20-30 microM) stimulated a concentration-dependent increase
in [Ca(2+)](i), deriving from extracellular calcium (1 mM), without affecting
the intra- and extracellular pH and membrane voltage. We conclude that AA
could activate an erythrocyte voltage-independent Ca(2+) transport via an
intermediate product of cyclooxygenase pathway...  

BMJ 1991 Mar 30;302(6779):762. Hormone replacement therapy induced chorea.
Steiger MJ, Quinn NP. University Department of Clinical Neurology, Institute
of Neurology, London.  

Nippon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi 1991 Dec 20;67(12):1319-38. [Cation metabolism
and the effects of circulating factors in pregnancy induced hypertension]
Takashima M, Morikawa H, Yamasaki M, Mochizuki M. These data suggest that the
increase of p-[Ca2+]i and r-[Na+]i in PIH is important in the initiation and
maintenance of hypertension by influencing peripheral vascular resistance, and
also various factors in the serum of PIH women may contribute to the
accumulation of intracellular ionized calcium in patients with PIH.  

Hear Res 2001 Apr;154(1-2):81-7. Effects of gentamicin and pH on [Ca2+]i in
apical and basal outer hair cells from guinea pigs. Tan CT, Lee SY, Yao CJ,
Liu SH, Lin-Shiau SY. By means of fura-2 microspectrofluorimetry, we measured
the intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i) of OHCs bathed in Hanks'
balanced salt solution (pH 7.40) during either a resting state or high
K+-induced depolarization. While gentamicin and extracellular acidification
(pH 7.14) can separately attenuate this increase in [Ca2+]i in both types of
OHCs, their suppressive effects are additive in basal OHCs, but not in apical
OHCs.  

Biochem Pharmacol 1983 Jan 15;32(2):355-60. Induction of mast cell secretion
by parathormone. Tsakalos ND, Theoharides TC, Kops SK, Askenase PW. The
biologically active fragment of human parathormone (PTH) and intact bovine PTH
were found to induce secretion of both serotonin and histamine from rat
peritoneal mast cells in vitro. Intradermal injection of PTH induced immediate
increases in vascular permeability suggesting that PTH could induce mast cell
secretion in vivo. These results demonstrate that elevated levels of PTH can
induce mast cell secretion in vitro and in vivo and suggest a possible role
for mast cells in the pathophysiology of non-allergic disease states.  

J Neurol Sci 1989 Feb;89(2-3):189-97. Hyperestrogenemia in neuromuscular
diseases. Usuki F, Nakazato O, Osame M, Igata A. The cases, comprising
bulbospinal muscular disease of the Kennedy-Alter-Sung type, Kugelberg-
Welander disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, were all euthyroid males. The baseline levels of serum estrone were
significantly higher in all of the patients than in age-matched normal
subjects. Serum baseline testosterone, LH and FSH levels were all essentially
normal, except low FSH levels in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  

MMW Munch Med Wochenschr 1976 Oct 22;118(43):1395-8. **[Oral application of
calcium and vitamin D2 in allergic bronchial asthma** ] Utz G, Hauck AM.
Within 60 minutes after application, a statistically significant reduction of
airway resistance (Rt) and intrathoracic gas volume (IGV), as well as an
increase of forced exspiratory one second volume (FEV1) and forced inspiratory
one second volume (FIV1) was observed, in comparison with placebo. **It is
concluded that calcium, given orally in combination with calciferol, causes a
decrease of airway obstruction in patients with allergic bronchial asthma.  
  
**J Urol 1994 Oct;152(4):1226-8. **Urinary incontinence due to idiopathic
hypercalciuria in children.** Vachvanichsanong P, Malagon M, Moore ES. In
addition to being the most common cause of microhematuria in children, our
study demonstrates that idiopathic **hypercalciuria is also frequently
associated with urinary incontinence of all types.  
  
**Magnes Trace Elem 1991-92;10(2-4):281-6. **Relation of magnesium to
osteoporosis and calcium urolithiasis.** Wallach S Magnesium influences
mineral metabolism in hard and soft tissues indirectly through hormonal and
other modulating factors, and by direct effects on the processes of bone
formation and resorption and of crystallization (mineralization). Its
causative and therapeutic relationships to calcium urolithiasis (CaUr) are
controversial despite an association between low urinary Mg and CaUr. Recent
studies have also found a tendency to low serum and/or lymphocyte Mg levels in
CaUr. Despite earlier studies demonstrating an inhibitory effect of Mg
supplementation on experimental CaUr in animals and in spontaneous CaUr in
humans, at least two properly controlled clinical trials of Mg supplementation
have failed to demonstrate a beneficial effect on CaUr frequency. With regard
to the skeleton, experimental studies have shown that Mg depletion causes a
decrease in both osteoblast and osteoclast activity with the development of a
form of 'aplastic bone disease'. At the same time, bone salt crystallization
is enhanced by Mg deficiency. Conversely, Mg excess impairs mineralization
with the development of an osteomalacia-like picture, and may also stimulate
bone resorption independently of parathyroid hormone. Whether or not Mg
depletion may be a causal factor in human osteoporosis is also controversial,
and there are conflicting reports as to the Mg content of osteoporotic bone.
Small decreases in serum and/or erythrocyte Mg in osteoporotic patients have
been reported, and one author has noted improved bone mineral density with a
multinutrient supplement rich in Mg. The extant data are sparse and indicate a
clear need for more rigorous study.

Semin Dial 2002 May-Jun;15(3):172-86 Calciphylaxis: emerging concepts in
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. Wilmer WA, Magro CM. Several recent
reports demonstrate that prolonged hyperphosphatemia and/or elevated calcium x
phosphorus products are associated with the syndrome. Protein malnutrition
increases the likelihood of calciphylaxis, as does warfarin use and
hypercoagulable states, such as protein C and/or protein S deficiency.  

J Clin Lab Anal 1998;12(3):145-9. A proposal for standardizing urine
collections for bone resorption markers measurement. Zaninotto M, Bernardi D,
Ujka F, Bonato P, Plebani M. The findings suggest that nocturnal collection
and first morning void samples provide the most reliable data on the rate of
bone degradation, possibly showing bone loss not only in osteopenic patients
but also in women with a low T-score.  

Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2001 Aug;281(2):F366-73. Increased CO(2) stimulates
K/Rb reabsorption mediated by H-K-ATPase in CCD of potassium-restricted
rabbit. Zhou X, Nakamura S, Xia SL, Wingo CS.  

Sci Total Environ 1981 Apr;18:35-45 Water hardness and mortality in the
Netherlands. Zielhuis RL, Haring BJ. The hypothesis that the Ca and Mg
deficiency in areas with soft drinking water increases the risk of I.H.D.
death rate was supported by the finding that food loses more Ca and Mg when it
is cooked in soft water as compared to cooking in hard water. However,
investigation of a group of 17 municipalities of which mortality and water
quality data are known for three periods, 1958-1962, 1965-1970 and 1971-1977,
showed that the inverse statistical relation between I.H.D. Mortality and
water hardness still existed but with decreasing significance of correlation
coefficients.  

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1980 Dec;51(6):1274-8. Serotonin stimulates adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate accumulation in parathyroid adenoma. Zimmerman D, Abboud
HE, George LE, Edis AJ, Dousa TP. Since cAMP acts as a mediator of parathyroid
hormone (PTH) release, our results suggest that serotonin could be one of the
factors regulating PTH secretion and/or contributing to PTH hypersecretion in
various forms of primary hyperparathyroidism.  

Cas Lek Cesk 1997 Jul 30;136(15):459-63. **[New drugs with positive effects on
bones]** [Article in Czech] Zofkova I, Kanceva RL. Magnesium influences bone
in different ways. **It activates osteoblasts, increases bone mineralization,
and enhances the sensitivity of target tissues (incl. bone) to PTH and
1,25(OH)2 vitamin D3,** Under certain conditions however, magnesium can
stimulate bone resorption. A more potent factor than magnesium is stroncium,
which not only activates osteoblats but decreases the number of osteoclasts,
thus abolishing bone resorption and enhancing formation. **Bicarbonates are
also favourable for bone. NaHCO3 together with potassium citrate stimulates
osteoblasts and enhances bone mineralisation.**  
  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

