**Preventing and treating cancer with progesterone.**  
  
_"The energy of the mind is the essence of life." Aristotle_

All through the last century, as more and more resources were devoted to
solving "the cancer problem," the death rate from cancer increased every year.
Something was clearly wrong with the way the problem was being approached.

If you grind up a computer and dissolve it in acid, you can find out exactly
what substances it was made of, but you won't learn from that information how
the computer worked. Twentieth century biologists became fond of emulsifying
cells and studying the soluble parts. By the end of the century, they had
identified so many parts that the government was financing projects to use
supercomputers to try to understand how the parts interacted.

If some essential information was lost in studying the parts, supercomputation
isn't the way to find it. Even with infinite computing capacity, a description
of the electrons on carbon and hydrogen atoms on amino acids in protein
molecules won't lead to the reality of how those atoms would have functioned
in the living state.

The image of a cell as a watery solution contained in an elastic membrane bag
is still having a radically stupefying effect on biology and medicine. The
idea that a cell can be understood by using a computer to model a network of
interactions between genes and gene products is nothing more than a
technologizing of the primitive understanding of life that was promulgated by
the Weismann-Mendel-Morganist school. It was the dogmatic insistence of that
genetic determinist school that cancer originated with a genetic mutation.

By the middle of the 20th century, that dogma had excluded the most important
parts of biology from the schools and the journals. Ideas of a developmental
field, cellular coherence, and holistic cooperativity were denounced as
unscientific vitalism. Returning to the idea of a "cancer field" is an
essential first step in thinking realistically about preventing and treating
cancer, but that idea has hardly progressed since the 1930s.

In the last few years, interest in cloning and stem cells and tissue
regeneration has revived interest in studying the factors that contribute to
the spatial and temporal ordering of cell growth.

The idea of a developmental field was a fundamental part of embryology in the
first half of the 20th century. It was an empirical idea, supported most
commonly by evidence that diffusing substances and secreted materials governed
the differentiation of cells and tissues, but the form-generating effects of
bioelectric fields were also often demonstrated, and there was some evidence
that tissue radiations played a role. The extracellular matrix secreted by
cells served to transmit information between cells, but its form was regulated
by cells, and its structure was a factor governing the cells' differentiation.

Experiments in amphibians showed that regeneration of organs had a reciprocal
relationship with the development of cancer--a tumor could be turned into a
tail, for example, if it was grafted onto the stump following amputation of
the tail, but factors that weakened regeneration could cause a tumor to
develop. In these experiments, the normal organism's morphogenetic or
epimorphic field overrode the disordered developmental field of the tumor.

In the absence of overriding external influences, the disordered system of the
tumor, in which cells emitted many products of their disordered metabolism,
could interfere with the normal functions of the organism. All of the products
of the injured cells, including their altered extracellular matrix,
constituted the cancer field.

The recent recognition of the "bystander effect" of radiation exposure, in
which cells that haven't been irradiated undergo genetic changes or death when
they are exposed to irradiated cells, has provided an opportunity to return to
the "field" idea in cancer, because the stress-induced factors emitted by
irradiated cells are the same toxic factors emitted by cells undergoing
carcinogenesis from other causes, such as over-exposure to estrogen.

H. J. Muller, one of T. H. Morgan's students and colleagues, studied the
mutagenic effects of x-rays, and the genetic determinists argued that the
random changes produced in the genetic material by ionizing radiation provided
a model of the evolutionary process. Randomly altered genes and natural
selection would explain everything, including cancer. Every time cells divide,
their genes supposedly become more susceptible to random changes, so increased
replication of cells would increase the risk of producing genetic changes
leading to cancer. This idea is so simple and so widely believed that many
people focus only on the rate of proliferation, and the random mutations that
supposedly occur during proliferation, when they try to explain
carcinogenesis. They feel that it's reasonable to discuss cancer without
bothering to understand the physiology of the cell or the organism.

The organism can only be understood in its environments, and a cell can't be
understood without reference to the tissue and organism in which it lives.
Although the geneticists were at first hostile to the idea that nutrition and
geography could have anything to do with cancer, they soon tried to dominate
those fields, insisting that mutagens and ethnicity would explain everything.
But the evidence now makes it very clear that environment and nutrition affect
the risk of cancer in ways that are not primarily genetic.

Every tumor, like every person, has a uniqueness, but valid and practical
empirical generalizations can be made, if we understand some of their
properties and the conditions that govern their development and survival.

Percival Potts' observation of scrotal cancer in chimney sweeps eventually led
to the study of soot carcinogenesis, and then to the study of the properties
of the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in soot. The similarities of those
properties to estrogen's soon became apparent.

Over the decades, many studies have confirmed that prolonged, continuous
exposure to estrogen is carcinogenic, and that progesterone offsets those
effects.

Following the animal studies that showed that carcinogenesis by estrogen could
be prevented or reversed by progesterone, studies of the endogenous hormones
in women showed that those with a natural excess of estrogen, and/or
deficiency of progesterone, were the most likely to develop uterine or breast
cancers.

The Morganist school of genetic determinism moved into endocrinology with a
doctrine that hormones act only through hormone receptors, proteins which
activate certain genes.

Many researchers -- physical chemists, biochemists, cytologists,
embryologists, reproductive and developmental biologists, gerontologists,
physiologists, neurologists, endocrinologists -- were investigating estrogen's
properties and actions, and had made great progress by the 1950s, despite the
medical frauds being perpetrated by the estrogen industry (Rothenberg, 2005).

All of this complex and subtle work was of no interest to a small group of
people who wanted to impose their genetic views onto biology.

The inventor of the estrogen receptor, Elwood Jensen, has written that the
results of certain of his experiments "caused the demise of the
transhydrogenation hypothesis and convinced all but the most diehard
enzymologists that estradiol binds to a characteristic component of target
cells to exert its physiological effect without itself being chemically
altered." The hypothesis he referred to was just part of a large fairly
systematic international effort.

How he did away with the opposition, who were studying the complex metabolic
actions of estrogen, was by synthesizing isotope-labeled estradiol and
estrone, and claiming to observe that they weren't metabolically altered, as
they produced their hormonal effect. Since the experiment was extremely
expensive, and required the cooperation of the Atomic Energy Commission, it
wasn't easily repeated. However, many experiments have subsequently
demonstrated that practically every tissue in the body (and plants and
bacteria) metabolize the estrogens, causing estradiol to change into estrone,
and estrone, into estradiol. Jensen's decisive and historically crucial
experiment was false.

But it served its purpose, and (with help from the pharmaceutical industry and
government granting agencies) marginalized the work of those "enzymologists"
and everyone else who persisted in studying the complex actions of estrogen.

The enzyme that converts the weaker estrone into the stronger estradiol is an
important factor in determining estrogen's effects on a particular tissue.
Progesterone is able to regulate the cell's metabolism, so that the oxidative
pathway, forming estrone from estradiol, predominates. Estrogen-dominated
tissues are likely to have a balance in the direction of reduction rather than
oxidation, increasing the amount of the active estradiol.

The immediate effects of estrogen and progesterone on cells, that occur long
before genes can be activated, were simply ignored or denied by the promoters
of the estrogen receptor doctrine. Some of these excitatory or antiexcitatory
effects are probably structural changes, that involve the mobilization of
calcium inside cells, and the activation or inhibition of reactions involving
phosphoric acid. Although they have been known for many years, they are always
referred to as "novel" or "non-classical" effects, and are called "membrane
effects," because that's the only way the reductionists are able to identify
changes that happen immediately throughout the cell.

Cellular excitation involves an increase of intracellular calcium and the
activation of phosphorylating enzymes in cells. Some experiments suggest
(Improta-Brears, et al., 1999) that the estrogen receptor mediates estrogen's
ability to mobilize calcium (leading to the activation of cell division,
mitosis). Whether or not it does, the recognition that estrogen activates
calcium, leading to activation of the phosphorylation system, should "cause
the demise of" the "classical estrogen receptor" doctrine, because the
phosphorylation system alters the expression of genes, much as the estrogen
receptor was supposed to do by its direct actions. **But before it alters the
expression of genes, it alters the activities of enzymes.** When estrogen
activates calcium and phosphorylation independently of the estrogen receptor,
the situation is even worse for the Jensen dogma.

Progesterone's opposition to those early excitatory effects of estrogen are so
basic, that there shouldn't be any difficulty in thinking of it as an
antiestrogen, that stops cell division primarily by opposing the excitatory
effects of estrogen and other mitogens. Progesterone's opposition to the
calcium-activating and phosphorylating effects of estrogen affects everything
in the cell, according to the cell's specific nature.

But the reductionists don't like "nongenomic" explanations of anything, even
when they are triggered by the estrogen receptor rather than by a membrane-
event. So, to argue that progesterone's opposition to estrogen is general,
it's necessary to examine each of estrogen's actions, where those actions are
clearly known, and to evaluate progesterone's effects on the same events.

When a cell is stimulated or slightly stressed, homeostatic mechanisms are
activated that help it to return to its normal resting state. The mobilization
of calcium and the phosphorylation system is followed by increased synthesis
of cholesterol and the formation of glucose from glycogen. Cholesterol itself
is protective, and in some cells it is massively converted into progesterone,
which is even more effective in restoring homeostasis.

In the ovary, the enzymes that synthesize cholesterol, along with the
production of progesterone, are activated by the pituitary hormone, FSH, but
also by estrogen. In the liver and uterus and vascular endothelium, which
aren't specialized for the production of progesterone, stimulation by estrogen
activates the enzymes to increase the formation of cholesterol.

When cells are injured or seriously stressed, instead of being able to
directly recover their normal quiescence, they may instead mobilize their
systems for growing and replicating, to replace damaged or destroyed cells.

Prolonged exposure to estrogen, that can't be offset by the homeostatic
factors, such as progesterone, typically causes cells to enter a growth phase.
(But so do other excitatory processes, such as ionizing radiation.)

One of the basic reactions to injury is to shift the cell away from oxidative
metabolism to glycolytic metabolism, which is inefficient, but can support
cell division. Chemical stains show that during cell division cells are in a
reduced state, with abundant sulfhydryl groups including reduced glutathione
and protein sulfhydryls. This shift in itself increases the formation of
active estradiol from estrone.

In the inflamed or estrogen dominated cell, enzymes such as the cyclooxidases
(COX), that convert arachidonic acid into prostaglandins, are activated. Beta-
glucuronidase and sulfatases are activated, and these cause intracellular
estrogen to increase, by removing the water soluble sulfate and glucuronate
portions from estrogens that had been inactivated. The detoxifying enzymes
that attach those molecules to estrogen are inactivated in the estrogen
dominated cell. The prostaglandin formed from arachidonic acid stimulates the
formation of the enzyme aromatase or estrogen synthetase, that converts
androgens into estrogen.

Those processes, initiated by excitation or injury, increase the amount of
estrogen in the cell, which intensifies the excitation.

Progesterone opposes all of those processes, decreasing the amount of estrogen
in the cell by modifying the activities of those five types of enzyme.

Although many kinds of protein (including enzymes) bind estrogen, the protein
that Jensen called "the estrogen receptor" is largely responsible for the
ability of the uterus and breasts to retain high concentrations of estrogen.
Various kinds of stimulation or stress (including heat and oxygen deprivation)
cause its appearance, and estrogen itself increases the amount of the estrogen
receptor in a cell. The estrogen receptor doesn't just "activate genes," as
the Jensen dogma claimed. For example, the estrogen receptor directly binds
and inactivates the "tumor suppressor" p53 protein, which otherwise would
restrain the replication of damaged cells.

Progesterone causes the estrogen receptor to be eliminated. (Batra; Boling and
Blandau; Resko, et al.)

Among the cell activating factors, other than estrogen, are proteins that are
considered to be "oncogenes," because of their involvement in cancer. Several
of these proteins are activated by estrogen, inhibited by progesterone. The
term "oncogene" refers to any gene that contributes to the development of
cancer, but it is so burdened by ideology that it shouldn't be used as if it
had a simple clear meaning.

A variety of proteins promote cell activity and replication, under the
influence of estrogen. The "composite transcription factor activating protein
1," AP-1 which integrates the effects of other transcription factors, is
important in a variety of cell types, and its activity is increased by
estrogen and decreased by progesterone.

When the "progesterone receptor" **lacks progesterone,** it has the opposite
effect of progesterone, and this feature has been used propagandistically, by
infecting cells with a virus carrying the progesterone receptor protein, and
then suggesting that the disturbed functions of the cell reflect a potential
effect of progesterone. The receptor, lacking progesterone, tells the cell
that it has a progesterone deficiency, but too many molecular endocrinologists
are trying to say that the receptor protein is the same as the progesterone.

The generality of the process of excitation/activation can be clearly seen in
the effects of the nerve-inhibiting GABA and the nerve-exciting glutamate or
NMDA. In cultured breast cancer cells, GABA inhibits growth, NMDA increases
growth. As in the brain, progesterone supports the actions of GABA, and
opposes those of NMDA or the excitatory amino acids, while estrogen in general
promotes the effects of the excitatory amino acids, and opposes those of GABA.

Both the excitatory amino acids and a peptide that promotes inflammation,
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), activate the enzyme which makes estrogen,
aromatase. Estrogen, by activating NF kappaB, increases the formation of TNF,
which in itself can promote the growth and metastasis of cancer. Various
antiinflammatory agents, including aspirin, progesterone, testosterone,
saturated fats, and glycine, can inhibit the production of NF kappaB.

An enzyme that has been thought of mainly in relation to the brain is
catechol-O-methyl transferase, which is inhibited by estrogen (producing
effects similar to cocaine), leading to brain excitation.The enzyme detoxifies
catecholestrogen (Creveling, 2003), protecting cells from DNA damage (Lavigne,
et al., 2001). When the activity of this enzyme is low, there is increased
risk of breast cancer (Matsui, et al., 2000). Progesterone increases its
activity (Inoue and Creveling, 1991, 1995).

Another enzyme system that affects the body's reactions to stress and modifies
processes of inflammation and growth, the monoamino-oxidases, is affected
oppositely by estrogen and progesterone. Estrogen's effects are partly
mediated by increased formation of serotonin, progesterone's, by decreasing
it. Histamine is another promoter of inflammation that is increased by
estrogen, decreased by progesterone.

Estrogen's effects in the nervous system go beyond the production of cocaine-
like hypomania, or chorea, or epilepsy, and include the activation of the
basic stress hormones, increasing the formation in the hypothalamus of pro-
opiomelanocortin (POMC), which is a precursor of ACTH to activate the
adrenals, and endorphins ("endogenous opiates"), which stimulate growth
processes. Both endorphins and ACTH can be found in tumors such as breast
cancer. The ACTH stimulates the production of cortisol, that protects against
some of the immediate causes of inflammation and growth, but that contributes
to the loss of resistance, and increases estrogen synthesis.

A protein called the sigma receptor, known for its role in cocaine's action,
binds progesterone, and can inhibit the growth of cancer. Some anesthetics
have similar effects on tumors, acting through this protein. The sigma
receptor, in association with progesterone or pregnenolone, is protective
against the excitatory amino acids.

The extracellular medium changes during the development of a tumor. Irritated
hypoxic cells, and estrogen-stimulated cells, increase their production of
collagen, and the increase of collagen interferes with normal cell functions.
Progesterone reduces the formation of collagen, and probably contributes to
its removal.

Naloxone or naltrexone, which blocks the actions of the endorphins and
morphine, is being used to inhibit the growth of various kinds of cancer,
including breast cancer and prostate cancer. Leptin (which is promoted by
estrogen) is a hormone produced by fat cells, and it, like estrogen, activates
the POMC-related endorphin stress system. The endorphins activate histamine,
another promoter of inflammation and cell division.

Progesterone opposes those various biochemical effects of estrogen in multiple
ways, for example by inhibiting the ACTH stress response, by restraining
cortisol's harmful actions, and by inhibiting leptin.

Mediators of the radiation bystander effect include NO, TNF, COX, and
prostaglandins. These are produced by other things that cause inflammation and
injury, including estrogen.

Cell division, when it is part of the body's continuous renewal and
adaptation, isn't a source of mutations or degeneration, but when it is
induced by the mediators of inflammation produced in response to injury, it
leads to inherited changes, loss of differentiated function, and eventually to
genetic instability.

When cell division is so disturbed that the number of chromosomes becomes
abnormal, the instability of these cells decreases their ability to survive,
but when the causes of the inflammation persist, they will continue to be
replaced by other abnormal cells. The toxic products of dying cells can reach
a point at which the debris can't be removed, adding to the injury and
inflammation. The damaged bystander cells spread their influence through a
cancer field, injuring more cells.

One of the "field" effects of cancer is the stimulation of new blood vessel
development, angiogenesis. Lactic acid stimulates the formation of new blood
vessels, the secretion of collagen, and tumor growth. Low oxygen, nitric
oxide, carbon monoxide, prostaglandins and other products of tissue stress can
stimulate the growth of new blood vessels, at the same time that they
stimulate tumor growth and impair oxidative metabolism. Several of these
agents promote each other's activity.

Therapeutic thinking has been influenced by the doctrine of the mutant cell as
the initiator of cancer, leading to the idea that only things which kill the
cancer cells can cure cancer. But when the body stops activating the processes
of inflammation and growth, normal processes of tissue repair have an
opportunity to eliminate the tumor. Even the fibroblasts which normally
secrete collagen can participate in its removal (Simoes, et al., 1984).
Something as simple as eliminating lactate can change their functions.

Although the angiogenic action of lactate has been known for several decades,
some researchers believed that a specific anti-angiogenic peptide could be
found which would stop the growth of cancer cells. The interest in
angiogenesis tacitly acknowledges that there is a cancer field, but the faith
that cancer could be cured only by killing the mutant cells seems to have
guided the search for a single antiangiogenic substance. Such a substance
would be toxic to normal tissues, since blood vessels are constantly being
renewed.

The more advanced a tumor is, the more numerous the growth-promoting factors
are likely to be, and the weaker the body's ability becomes to control them.

The search for toxic factors to kill the cancer cells is unlikely to lead to a
generally effective treatment. Even immunological approaches that think in
terms of destroying a tumor might be misconceiving the nature of the problem.
For example, the protein called "tumor necrosis factor" (TNF) or cachectin was
discovered as a result of Lawrence Burton's work in the 1960s. He extracted
proteins from the blood that could shrink some tumors in mice with amazing
speed. In the right setting, TNF is involved in the destruction of tumors, but
when other factors are missing, it can make them worse. Burton was focussing
on factors in the immune system that could destroy cancer, but he ignored the
basic problem of tissue degeneration that produces tumors which are complex
and changing.

If the cancer-productive field is taken into account, all of the factors that
promote and sustain that field should be considered during therapy.

Two ubiquitous carcinogenic factors that can be manipulated without toxins are
the polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) and estrogen. These closely interact
with each other, and there are many ways in which they can be modulated.

For example, keeping cells in a well oxygenated state with thyroid hormone and
carbon dioxide will shift the balance from estradiol toward the weaker
estrone. The thyroid stimulation will cause the liver to excrete estrogen more
quickly, and will help to prevent the formation of aromatase in the tissues.
Low temperature is one of the factors that increases the formation of
estrogen. Lactic acid, serotonin, nitric oxide, prostaglandins, and the
endorphins will be decreased by the shift toward efficient oxidative
metabolism.

Progesterone synthesis will be increased by the higher metabolic rate, and
will tend to keep the temperature higher.

Thyroid hormone, by causing a shift away from estrogen and serotonin, lowers
prolactin, which is involved in the promotion of several kinds of cancer.

Vitamin D and vitamin K have some antiestrogenic effects. Vitamin D and
calcium lower the inflammation-promoting parathyroid hormone (PTH).

Eliminating polyunsaturated fats from the diet is essential if the bystander
effect is eventually to be restrained. Aspirin and salicylic acid can block
many of the carcinogenic effects of the PUFA. Saturated fats have a variety of
antiinflammatory and anticancer actions. Some of those effects are direct,
others are the result of blocking the toxic effects of the PUFA. Keeping the
stored unsaturated fats from circulating in the blood is helpful, since it
takes years to eliminate them from the tissues after the diet has changed.
Niacinamide inhibits lipolysis. Avoiding over-production of lipolytic
adrenaline requires adequate thyroid hormone, and the adjustment of the diet
to minimize fluctuations of blood sugar.

The endorphins are antagonistic to progesterone, and when they are minimized,
progesterone tends to increase, and to be more effective. The drugs naloxone
and naltrexone, which block the effects of the endorphins, have several
remarkable effects that resemble progesterone's. Naltrexone has been
successfully used to treat prostate and breast cancer.

Opiates are still commonly used for pain relief in cancer patients, despite
the evidence that has accumulated for several decades indicating that they
promote inflammation and cancer growth, while suppressing immunity and causing
tissue catabolism, exacerbating the wasting that commonly occurs with cancer.
Their use, rather than alternatives such as procaine, aspirin, and
progesterone, is nothing but a medical fetish.

Stress and estrogen tend to produce alkalosis, while thyroid, carbon dioxide,
and adequate protein in the diet help to prevent alkalosis.

Antihistamines and some of the antiserotonin drugs (including "dopaminergic"
lisuride and bromocriptine) are sometimes useful in cancer treatment, but the
safe way to lower serotonin is to reduce the consumption of tryptophan, and to
avoid excessive cortisol production (which mobilizes tryptophan from the
muscles). Pregnenolone and sucrose tend to prevent over-production of
cortisol.

In the breast, COX-2 converts arachidonic acid into prostaglandins, which
activate the enzyme aromatase, that forms estrogen from androgens. Until the
tissues are free of PUFA, aspirin and salicylic acid can be used to stop
prostaglandin synthesis.

Thyroid is needed to keep the cell in an oxidative, rather than reductive
state, and progesterone (which is produced elsewhere only when cells are in a
rapidly oxidizing state) activates the processes that remove estrogen from the
cell, and inactivates the processes that would form new estrogen in the cell.

Thyroid, and the carbon dioxide it produces, prevent the formation of the
toxic lactic acid. When there is enough carbon dioxide in the tissues, the
cell is kept in an oxidative state, and the formation of toxic free radicals
is suppressed. Carbon dioxide therapy is extremely safe.

In the 1930s, primates as well as rodents had been used in experiments to show
the carcinogenic effects of estrogen, and the protective effects of
progesterone.

By 1950, the results of animal studies of progesterone's anticancer effects
were so clear that the National Cancer Institute got involved. But the
estrogen industry had already been conducting its campaign against
progesterone, and had convinced most doctors that it was inactive when taken
orally, and so was inferior to their proprietary drugs that they called
"progestins." The result was that it was usually given by injection, dissolved
in vegetable oil or synthetic solvents such as benzyl benzoate or benzyl
alcohol, which are very toxic and inflammation-producing.

The NCI researchers (Hertz, et al., 1951) treated 17 women with visible
cancers of the uterine cervix that had been confirmed by biopsies. They were
given daily intramuscular injections of 250 mg of progesterone in vegetable
oil. Although they described the treatment as "massive dosage with
progesterone," it didn't prevent menstruation in any of the women who had been
menstruating before the treatment began. During a healthy pregnancy, a woman
produces more progesterone than that.

Their article includes some photographs of cervical tumors before treatment,
and after 31 days, 50 days, and 65 days of progesterone treatment. The
improvement is clear. The examining physicians described softening of the
tumor, and stopping of bleeding and pain.

"In eleven of the 17 treated patients visible and palpable evidence of
regressive alteration of the tumor mass could be demonstrated. This consisted
of (a) distinct reduction in size of the visible portion of the cancer as well
as reduction of the palpable extent of the mass, (b) reduction in vascularity
and friability of the visible lesion with a clearly demonstrable
epithelization of previously raw surfaces and (c) markedly increased
pliability of the previously rigid and infiltrated parametria."

"In 10 cases there was associated with this type of gross change a reduction
in, or complete cessation of vaginal bleeding and discharge."

"Only one of the 17 patients showed active progression of the carcinomatous
process while under the progesterone administration. The six patients whose
lesions failed to show clearly demonstrable regressive changes showed minor
alterations in size and vascularity of insufficient degree to be convincing to
all clinical observers concerned. Nevertheless, none of the lesions under
study appeared to be accelerated by progesterone."

Observing very similar patients under similar conditions while they were
waiting for surgery, but were not receiving progesterone, they saw no such
regressions of tumors.

The photographs and descriptions of the changes in the tumors were remarkable
for any cancer study, but to have been produced by a treatment that didn't
even alter the patients' menstrual cycle, the reader might expect the authors
to discuss their plans for further studies of such a successful method.

But instead, they concluded "We do not consider the regressive changes
observed to be sufficient to indicate the use of progesterone as a therapeutic
agent in carcinoma of the cervix."

(Their research was supported by a grant from the American Cancer Society.)

If the researchers had bothered to test progesterone on themselves or on
animals, they would have discovered that it is fully active when taken orally,
dissolved in oil, and that nontoxic saturated fats could have been used.
Progesterone anesthesia was very well known at that time, so it would have
been reasonable to use doses that were at least equivalent to the
concentrations present during pregnancy, even if they didn't want to use doses
that would approach the anesthetic level. The total daily doses could have
been about ten times higher, if they had been given orally as divided doses.

The solvent issue continues to impede research in the use of progesterone for
treating cancer, but the main problem is the continuing belief that "the
cancer cell" is the problem, rather than the cancer field. Substances are
tested for their ability to kill cancer cells _in vitro_ , because of the
basic belief that mutated genes are the cause of the disease. When
progesterone is tested on cancer cells _in vitro,_ the experimenter often sees
nothing but the effects of the solvent, and doesn't realize that nearly all of
the progesterone has precipitated in the medium, before reaching the cancer
cells.

The cancer industry began a few years ago to combine chemicals for
chemotherapy, for example adding caffeine to paclitaxel or platinum
(cisplatin), or histamine to doxorubicin, but they do it simply to increase
the toxicity of the chemical to the tumor, or to decrease its toxicity to the
patient. Doctors sometimes refer to combined chemotherapy as a "shotgun
approach," meaning that it lacks the acumen of their ideal silver bullet
approach. If cancers were werewolves, the cancer industry's search for more
refined killing technologies might be going in the right direction. But the
genetic doctrine of cancer's origin is just as mythical as werewolves and
vampires.

A safe physiological approach to cancer, based on the opposition of
progesterone to estrogen, would be applicable to every type of cancer promoted
by estrogen, or by factors which produce the same effects as estrogen, and
that would include all of the known types of cancer. Estrogen acts even on
cells that have no "estrogen receptors," but estrogen receptors can be found
in every organ.

As estrogen's non-feminizing actions are increasingly being recognized to
include contributions to other kinds of disease, including Alzheimer's
disease, heart disease, and rheumatoid arthritis, the idea of the bystander
effect, and the field of cellular degeneration, will eventually clear the way
for a rational use of the therapeutic tools that already exist.

There are several types of drug---carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, to increase
carbon dioxide in the tissues, lysergic acid derivatives, to block serotonin
and suppress prolactin, anti-opiates, antiexcitotoxic and GABAergic agents,
anesthetics, antihistamines, anticholinergics, salicylic acid derivatives---
that could probably be useful in a comprehensive therapy for cancer, but their
combinations won't be explored as long as treatments are designed only to
kill.

Preventing or correcting disturbances in the morphogenetic field should be the
focus of attention.  

REFERENCES  

Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 Mar 15;175(2):625-30. **Antitumor activity of
naltrexone and correlation with steroid hormone receptors.** Abou-Issa H,
Tejwani GA.

Contraception 1981 Apr;23(4):447-55. **Comparison of plasma and myometrial
tissue concentrations of estradiol-17 beta and progesterone in nonpregnant
women.** Akerlund M, Batra S, Helm G.

Obstetrics and gynecology New York 2001 vol.97 no.4 (Supplement) page S10.
Topical progesterone cream has antiproliferative effect on estrogen-stimulated
endometrium, Anasti, James N. Leonetti, H B. Wilson, K J.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jun 11;93(12):6169-74. **Modulation of AP-1
activity by the human progesterone receptor in endometrial adenocarcinoma
cells.** Bamberger AM, Bamberger CM, Gellersen B, Schulte HM.

J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod (Paris). 1990;19(3):269-74. **[The in vivo effect
of the local administration of progesterone on the mitotic activity of human
ductal breast tissue. Results of a pilot study]** Barrat J, de Lignieres B,
Marpeau L, Larue L, Fournier S, Nahoul K, Linares G, Giorgi H, Contesso G.
**"Mean mitotic activity was significantly lower in progesterone treated group
(0.04/1,000 cells) than in placebo (0.10/1,000 cells) or in estradiol
(0.22/1,000 cells) treated groups. High concentration of progesterone
sustained in human breast tissue in vivo during 11 to 13 days does not
increase, but actually decreases mitotic activity in normal lobular epithelial
cells."** Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial

Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1979 Dec;11(6):603-10. **Interrelations between plasma
and tissue concentrations of 17 beta-oestradiol and progesterone during human
pregnancy.** Batra S, Bengtsson LP, Sjoberg NO

Endocrinology 1976 Nov; 99(5): 1178-81. **Unconjugated estradiol in the
myometrium of pregnancy.** Batra S.

J Steroid Biochem 1989 Jan;32(1A):35-9. **Tissue specific effects of
progesterone on progesterone and estrogen receptors in the female urogenital
tract.** Batra S, Iosif CS.

Lancet. 1989 Oct 28;2(8670):1008-10. **Saturation of fat and cholecystokinin
release: implications for pancreatic carcinogenesis.** Beardshall K, Frost G,
Morarji Y, Domin J, Bloom SR, Calam J.

FASEB J. 2006 Oct;20(12):2009-16. **Therapeutic levels of aspirin and
salicylate directly inhibit a model of angiogenesis through a Cox-independent
mechanism.** Borthwick GM, Johnson AS, Partington M, Burn J, Wilson R, Arthur
HM.

Br J Cancer. 2002 Oct 7;87(8):876-82. **The association of breast mitogens
with mammographic densities.** Boyd NF, Stone J, Martin LJ, Jong R, Fishell E,
Yaffe M, Hammond G, Minkin S.

Eur J Pharmacol. 1995 May 15;278(2):151-60. **Sigma binding site ligands
inhibit cell proliferation in mammary and colon carcinoma cell lines and
melanoma cells in culture.** Brent PJ, Pang GT.

Fertil Steril 1995; 63(4):785-91. **Influences of percutaneous administration
of estradiol and progesterone on human breast epithelial cell cycle in vivo.**
Chang KJ, et al. The effect of transdermal estradiol (1.5 mg), transdermal
progesterone (25 mg), and combined transdermal estradiol and progesterone (1.5
mg and 25 mg) on human breast epithelial cell cycles was evaluated in vivo.
Results demonstrated that **estradiol significantly increases cell
proliferation, while progesterone significantly decreases cell replication
below that observed with placebo.** Transdermal progesterone was also shown to
reduce estradiol-induced proliferation.

Br J Cancer. 1997;75(2):251-7. **Type I insulin-like growth factor receptor
gene expression in normal human breast tissue treated with oestrogen and
progesterone.** Clarke RB, Howell A, Anderson E. "The epithelial proliferation
of normal human breast tissue xenografts implanted into athymic nude mice is
significantly increased from basal levels by oestradiol (E2), but not
progesterone (Pg) treatment at serum concentrations similar to those observed
in the luteal phase of the human menstrual cycle." "The data indicate that the
IGFR-I mRNA is up-regulated by two to threefold compared with untreated levels
by 7 and 14 days E2 treatment. **In contrast, 7 or 14 days Pg treatment down-
regulates the receptor mRNA to approximately half that of untreated levels,**
whereas combination E2 and Pg treatment produced a twofold increase in IGFR-I
mRNA levels compared with untreated tissue."

Brain Res. 2006 Dec 18;1126(1):2-26. **Functional significance of the rapid
regulation of brain estrogen action: Where do the estrogens come from?**
Cornil CA, Ball GF, Balthazart J.

Am J Epidemiol. 1981 Aug;114(2):209-17. **Breast cancer incidence in women
with a history of progesterone deficiency.** Cowan LD, Gordis L, Tonascia JA,
Jones GS. "Women in the PD [progesterone deficiency] group had 5.4 times the
risk of premenopausal breast cancer as compared to women in the NH group."
"Women in the PD group also experienced a 10-fold increase in deaths from all
malignant neoplasm compared to the NH group."

Growth. 1975 Dec;39(4):475-96. **Cancer-related aspects of regeneration
research: a review.** Donaldson DJ, Mason JM.

Int J Cancer. 1992 May 28;51(3):416-24. **Capacity of adipose tissue to
promote growth and metastasis of a murine mammary carcinoma: effect of
estrogen and progesterone.** Elliott BE, Tam SP, Dexter D, Chen ZQ.
**"Estrogen can stimulate growth of SPI in adipose tissue sites, whereas
progesterone inhibits growth.** "

Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2002 Jul;74(2):167-76. **Regulation of MCF-7 breast
cancer cell growth by beta-estradiol sulfation.** Falany JL, Macrina N, Falany
CN.

Br J Cancer 1981 Aug;44(2):177-81. **Morphological evaluation of cell turnover
in relation to the menstrual cycle in the "resting" human breast.** Ferguson
DJ, Anderson TJ

Eur J Cancer. 1992;28A(6-7):1143-7. **Fatty acid composition of normal and
malignant cells and cytotoxicity of stearic, oleic and sterculic acids in
vitro.** Fermor BF, Masters JR, Wood CB, Miller J, Apostolov K, Habib NA.

Fertil Steril. 1998 May;69(5):963-9. **Estradiol and progesterone regulate the
proliferation of human breast epithelial cells.** Foidart JM, Colin C, Denoo
X, Desreux J, Beliard A, Fournier S, de Lignieres B. "Exposure to progesterone
for 14 days reduced the estradiol-induced proliferation of normal breast
epithelial cells in vivo." Randomized Controlled Trial

Mol Cell Biochem 1999 Dec;202(1-2):53-61. **Bcl-2, survivin and variant CD44
v7-v10 are downregulated and p53 is upregulated in breast cancer cells by
progesterone: inhibition of cell growth and induction of apoptosis.** Formby
B, Wiley TS."This study sought to elucidate the **mechanism by which
progesterone inhibits the proliferation of breast cancer cells."** "The
results demonstrated that progesterone does produce a strong antiproliferative
effect on breast cancer cell lines containing progesterone receptors, and
induced apoptosis. **The relatively high levels of progesterone utilized were
similar to those seen during the third trimester of human pregnancy.** "

Ann Clin Lab Sci 1998 Nov-Dec;28(6):360-9. **Progesterone inhibits growth and
induces apoptosis in breast cancer cells: inverse effects on Bcl-2 and p53.**
Formby B, Wiley TS.

Cancer Lett 1999 Jul 1;141(1-2):63-71. **Progestins suppress estrogen-induced
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) subtypes in uterine
endometrial cancer cells.** Fujimoto J, Sakaguchi H, Hirose R, Ichigo S,
Tamaya T.

Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;26(20):7632-44. **TReP-132 Is a Novel Progesterone
Receptor Coactivator Required for the Inhibition of Breast Cancer Cell Growth
and Enhancement of Differentiation by Progesterone.** Gizard F, Robillard R,
Gross B, Barbier O, Revillion F, Peyrat JP, Torpier G, Hum DW, Staels B.

Am J Physiol. 1982 Oct;243(4):H619-27. **NAD/NADH: redox state changes on cat
brain cortex during stimulation and hypercapnia.** Gyulai L, Dora E, Kovach
AG.

Drug Metab Dispos. 1995 Mar;23(3):430-2. **Induction of catechol-O-
methyltransferase in the luminal epithelium of rat uterus by progesterone:
inhibition by RU-486.** Inoue K, Creveling CR.

Hertz R, Cromer J.K., Young J.P. and Westfall B.B., pages 366-374, in
**_Symposium on Steroids in Experimental and Clinical Practice,_** Abraham
White, Blakiston, 195.

Cancer Res. 2005 Jul 15;65(14):6450-8. **Progesterone receptor in non-small
cell lung cancer--a potent prognostic factor and possible target for endocrine
therapy.** Ishibashi H, Suzuki T, Suzuki S, Niikawa H, Lu L, Miki Y, Moriya T,
Hayashi S, Handa M, Kondo T, Sasano H. "Cell proliferation was inhibited by
progesterone in these progesterone receptor-positive NSCLC cells in a dose-
dependent manner, which was inhibited by progesterone receptor blocker.
Proliferation of these tumor cells injected into nude mice was also dose-
dependently inhibited by progesterone, with a concomitant increase of p21 and
p27 and a decrease of cyclin A, cyclin E, and Ki67. Results of our present
study suggested that progesterone receptor was a potent prognostic factor in
NSCLCs and progesterone inhibited growth of progesterone receptor-positive
NSCLC cells. Therefore, progesterone therapy may be clinically effective in
suppressing development of progesterone receptor-positive NSCLC patients."

Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1986 Aug;333(4):368-76. **Effect of
progesterone on the metabolism of noradrenaline in rabbit uterine endometrium
and myometrium.** Kennedy JA, de la Lande IS.

Agressologie 1971;12(2):105-112. **[The inhibiting effect of atmospheres
oxygenated without CO2 on the respiration of rat tissue slices (brain, liver).
Physiopathological implications].** Laborit H, Lamothe C, Thuret F

Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Jan 1;169(1):46-56. **Hypercapnic acidosis
attenuates endotoxin-induced acute lung injury.** Laffey JG, Honan D, Hopkins
N, Hyvelin JM, Boylan JF, McLoughlin P.

_*Endocrinology. 1996 Apr;137(4):1505-6._

_[Comment on: Laidlaw, et al., Endocrinology. 1995 Jan;136(1):164-71.]_ **
_Experiments on proliferation of normal human breast tissue in nude mice do
not show that progesterone does not stimulate breast cells._** _Pike MC, Ursin
G, Spicer DV. Letter_

*Endocrinology. 1995 Jan;136(1):164-71. **The proliferation of normal human breast tissue implanted into athymic nude mice is stimulated by estrogen but not progesterone.** Laidlaw IJ, Clarke RB, Howell A, Owen AW, Potten CS, Anderson E. "We conclude that E2 is sufficient to stimulate human breast epithelial cell proliferation at physiologically relevant concentrations and that P does not affect proliferation either alone or after E2 priming."

Agressologie 1971;12(2):105-112. **[The inhibiting effect of atmospheres
oxygenated without CO2 on the respiration of rat tissue slices (brain, liver).
Physiopathological implications].** Laborit H, Lamothe C, Thuret F

Endocrinology. 1995 Jan;136(1):164-71. **The proliferation of normal human
breast tissue implanted into athymic nude mice is stimulated by estrogen but
not progesterone.** Laidlaw IJ, Clarke RB, Howell A, Owen AW, Potten CS,
Anderson E.

Int J Cancer. 2005 Nov 20;117(4):561-8. **Gene regulation profile reveals
consistent anticancer properties of progesterone in hormone-independent breast
cancer cells transfected with progesterone receptor.** Leo JC, Wang SM, Guo
CH, Aw SE, Zhao Y, Li JM, Hui KM, Lin VC. **"Progesterone consistently
suppressed the expression of genes required for cell proliferation and
metastasis and increased the expression of many tumor-suppressor genes.** "

Fertil Steril. 2003 Jan;79(1):221-2. **Topical progesterone cream has an
antiproliferative effect on estrogen-stimulated endometrium.** Leonetti HB,
Wilson KJ, Anasti JN. Randomized Controlled Trial

Prostate. 1995 Apr;26(4):194-204. **Growth inhibition of androgen-insensitive
human prostate carcinoma cells by a 19-norsteroid derivative agent,
mifepristone.** Lin MF, Kawachi MH, Stallcup MR, Grunberg SM, Lin FF.
"Mifepristone, also known as RU 486, is a 19-norsteroid derivative. Currently,
mifepristone is being tested in clinical trials on meningioma and breast
cancer."" **The results demonstrated that while both DHT and Dex alone had
essentially no effect on cell growth, progesterone alone resulted in a 20%
growth inhibition, while mifepristone had more than 60% inhibition with a
16-day exposure. At an equal concentration, the degree of growth inhibition of
PC-3 cells by mifepristone or progesterone was partially diminished by
simultaneous exposure to Dex.** "

Am J Pathol. 2003 Jun;162(6):1781-7. **Progesterone induces cellular
differentiation in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells transfected with
progesterone receptor complementary DNA.** Lin VC, Jin R, Tan PH, Aw SE, Woon
CT, Bay BH.

Endocrinology. 2003 Dec;144(12):5650-7. **Distinct molecular pathways mediate
progesterone-induced growth inhibition and focal adhesion.** Lin VC, Woon CT,
Aw SE, Guo C.

Int J Cancer. 2005 Nov 20;117(4):561-8. **Gene regulation profile reveals
consistent anticancer properties of progesterone in hormone-independent breast
cancer cells transfected with progesterone receptor.** Leo JC, Wang SM, Guo
CH, Aw SE, Zhao Y, Li JM, Hui KM, Lin VC.

Int J Biometeorol. 1987 Sep;31(3):201-10. **Effects of chronic normobaric
hypoxic and hypercapnic exposure in rats: prevention of experimental chronic
mountain sickness by hypercapnia.** Lincoln B, Bonkovsky HL, Ou LC.

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2000 Jun;73(3-4):171-81. **Progesterone effect on
cell growth, ultrastructural aspect and estradiol receptors of normal human
breast epithelial (HBE) cells in culture.** Malet C, Spritzer P, Guillaumin D,
Kuttenn F. "On a culture system of normal human breast epithelial (HBE) cells,
we observed an inhibitory effect on cell growth of a long-term P treatment (7
days) in the presence or absence of E2, using two methods...." "Cells
exhibited a proliferative appearance after E2 treatment, and returned to a
quiescent appearance when P was added to E2." "Moreover, the
immunocytochemical study of E2 receptors indicated that **E2 increases its own
receptor level whereas P and R5020 have the opposite effect, thus limiting the
stimulatory effect of E2 on cell growth.** In the HBE cell culture system and
in long-term treatment, P and R5020 appear predominantly to inhibit cell
growth, both in the presence and absence of E2."

Horm Res. 1987;28(2-4):212-8. **Antiestrogen action of progesterone in breast
tissue.** Mauvais-Jarvis P, Kuttenn F, Gompel A. "Most data indicate that
progesterone and progestins have a strong antiestrogen effect on breast cell
appreciated by the decrease of estradiol receptor content, the decrease of
cell multiplication and the stimulation of 17 beta-hydroxysteroid activity
which may be considered as a marker of breast cell differentiation dependent
of progesterone receptor."

Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1982 Jan 29;104(2):570-6. **Progesterone-induced
inactivation of nuclear estrogen receptor in the hamster uterus is mediated by
acid phosphatase.** MacDonald RG, Okulicz WC, Leavitt WW.

Cancer Lett. 2005 Apr 18;221(1):49-53. **Effects of progesterone on ovarian
tumorigenesis in xenografted mice.** McDonnel AC, Van Kirk EA, Isaak DD,
Murdoch WJ.

Int J Cancer. 2004 Nov 1;112(2):312-8. **Endogenous sex hormones and
subsequent breast cancer in premenopausal women.** Micheli A, Muti P, Secreto
G, Krogh V, Meneghini E, Venturelli E, Sieri S, Pala V, Berrino F.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000 Sep;85(9):3442-52. **Progesterone withdrawal up-
regulates vascular endothelial growth factor receptor type 2 in the
superficial zone stroma of the human and macaque endometrium: potential
relevance to menstruation.** Nayak NR, Critchley HO, Slayden OD, Menrad A,
Chwalisz K, Baird DT, Brenner RM.

Endocrinology 1981 Dec;109(6):2273-5. **Progesterone-induced estrogen
receptor-regulatory factor in hamster uterine nuclei: preliminary
characterization in a cell-free system.** Okulicz WC, MacDonald RG, Leavitt WW
**In vitro studies have demonstrated a progesterone-induced activity
associated with the uterine nuclear fraction which resulted in the loss of
nuclear estrogen receptor.**

Mol Endocrinol. 1991 May;5(5):709-17. **Progestins induce down-regulation of
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) receptors in human breast cancer cells:
potential autocrine role of IGF-II.** Papa V, Hartmann KK, Rosenthal SM,
Maddux BA, Siiteri PK, Goldfine ID.

Gynecol Endocrinol. 1999 Jun;13 Suppl 4:11-9. **Biological effects of
progestins in breast cancer.** Pasqualini JR, Ebert C.

Gynecol Endocrinol. 2001 Dec;15 Suppl 6:44-52. **Biological effects of
progestins in breast cancer.** Pasqualini JR, Ebert C, Chetrite GS.

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Feb;93(2-5):221-36. **Recent insight on the
control of enzymes involved in estrogen formation and transformation in human
breast cancer.** Pasqualini JR, Chetrite GS.

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2002 Apr;11(4):361-8. **Steroid hormone
levels during pregnancy and incidence of maternal breast cancer.** Peck JD,
Hulka BS, Poole C, Savitz DA, Baird D, Richardson BE. " **When estrogen-to-
progesterone ratios were evaluated, there was an indication of a modest
increased incidence of breast cancer for those with high total estrogens and
high estrone levels relative to progesterone.** "

Br J Urol. 1990 Mar;65(3):268-70. **Erythrocyte stearic to oleic acid ratio in
prostatic carcinoma.** Persad RA, Gillatt DA, Heinemann D, Habib NA, Smith PJ.

Int J Cancer. 2006 Nov 9; **Inflammation and IGF-I activate the Akt pathway in
breast cancer.** Prueitt RL, Boersma BJ, Howe TM, Goodman JE, Thomas DD, Ying
L, Pfiester CM, Yfantis HG, Cottrell JR, Lee DH, Remaley AT, Hofseth LJ, Wink
DA, Ambs S.

Biology of reproduction 15, 153-157, 1976, **Sex steroids in reproductive
tract tissues: Regulation of estradiol concentrations by progesterone**. Resko
JA, Boling JL, Brenner RM and Blandau RJ.

Carla Rothenberg, **History of hormone therapy,**
http:[leda.law.harvard.edu/leda/data/711/Rothenberg05](http://leda.law.harvard.edu/leda/data/711/Rothenberg05).
pdf. **** 2005.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996 Apr;81(4):1495-501. **Characterization of
reproductive hormonal dynamics in the perimenopause.** Santoro N, Brown JR,
Adel T, Skurnick JH. Overall mean estrone conjugate excretion was greater in
the perimenopausal women compared to that in the younger women [76.9 ng/mg Cr
(range, 13.1-135) vs. 40.7 ng/mg Cr (range, 22.8-60.3); P = 0.023] and was
similarly elevated in both follicular and luteal phases. Luteal phase
pregnanediol excretion was diminished in the perimenopausal women compared to
that in younger normal subjects (range for integrated pregnanediol, 1.0-8.4
vs. 1.6-12.7 microg/mg Cr/luteal phase; P = 0.015). We conclude that
**altered ovarian function in the perimenopause can be observed as early as
age 43 yr and include hyperestrogenism, hypergonadotropism, and decreased
luteal phase progesterone excretion.** These hormonal alterations may well be
responsible for the increased gynecological morbidity that characterizes this
period of life.

Cancer Res. 1984 Feb;44(2):841-4. **High testosterone and low progesterone
circulating levels in premenopausal patients with hyperplasia and cancer of
the breast.** Secreto G, Recchione C, Fariselli G, Di Pietro S.

Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1988 Dec;72(3):443-52. **Progesterone down-regulation of
nuclear estrogen receptor: a fundamental mechanism in birds and mammals.**
Selcer KW, Leavitt WW.

Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 2000;27(1):54-6. **Hormonal reproductive status of
women at menopausal transition compared to that observed in a group of
midreproductive-aged women.** Sengos C, Iatrakis G, Andreakos C, Xygakis A,
Papapetrou P. " **CONCLUSION: The reproductive hormonal patterns in**
**perimenopausal women favor a relatively hypergonadotropic hyper-estrogenic
milieu.** "

J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 1994;(16):85-90. **Menstrual timing of treatment
for breast cancer.** Senie RT, Kinne DW.

J Neurosci. 2001 Aug 1;21(15):5723-9. **Progesterone blockade of estrogen
activation of mu-opioid receptors regulates reproductive behavior.** Sinchak
K, Micevych PE.

J Clin Pathol. 2005 Oct;58(10):1033-8. **Proliferating fibroblasts at the
invading tumour edge of colorectal adenocarcinomas are associated with
endogenous markers of hypoxia, acidity, and oxidative stress.** Sivridis E,
Giatromanolaki A, Koukourakis MI.

Neuroscience. 1991;42(2):309-20. **Progesterone administration attenuates
excitatory amino acid responses of cerebellar Purkinje cells.** Smith SS.

Cancer Causes Control. 2004 Feb;15(1):45-53. **Serum levels of sex hormones
and breast cancer risk in premenopausal women: a case-control study (USA).**
Sturgeon SR, Potischman N, Malone KE, Dorgan JF, Daling J, Schairer C, Brinton
LA. **"For luteal progesterone, the RR for the highest versus lowest tertile
was 0.55 (0.2-1.4)."**

Biomed Pharmacother 1984;38(8):371-9. **Breast cancer and oral contraceptives:
critique of the proposition that high potency progestogen products confer
excess risk.** Sturtevant FM A recent report by Pike et al. from the U. S. A.
concluded on the basis of epidemiologic evidence that an increased risk of
breast cancer was manifested by young women who had used combination oral
contraceptives (OC) with a high "potency" of progestogen over a prolonged
period. This conclusion is criticized in the present article, centering on
three cardinal defects in the Pike study: (1) The assigned potencies of OC's
are fiction and were derived from out-dated delay-of-menses data; (2) Well-
known risk factors for breast cancer were ignored; (3) The method assumed no
error of recall of OC brand, dose and duration of use occurring many years
before telephone interviews. Noting that others have not been able to confirm
these findings, it is concluded that there is no scientific basis for
accepting the suggestion of Pike et al.

Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7886-92. **Reduction of human metastatic breast
cancer cell aggressiveness on introduction of either form a or B of the
progesterone receptor and then treatment with progestins.** Sumida T, Itahana
Y, Hamakawa H, Desprez PY.

Endocr Relat Cancer 1999 Jun;6(2):307-14. **Aromatase overexpression and
breast hyperplasia, an in vivo model--continued overexpression of aromatase is
sufficient to maintain hyperplasia without circulating estrogens, and
aromatase inhibitors abrogate these preneoplastic changes in mammary glands.**
Tekmal RR, Kirma N, Gill K, Fowler K To test directly the role of breast-
tissue estrogen in initiation of breast cancer, we have developed the
aromatase-transgenic mouse model and demonstrated for the first time that
increased mammary estrogens resulting from the overexpression of aromatase in
mammary glands lead to the induction of various preneoplastic and neoplastic
changes that are similar to early breast cancer. Our current studies show
aromatase overexpression is sufficient to induce and maintain early
preneoplastic and neoplastic changes in female mice without circulating
ovarian estrogen. Preneoplastic and neoplastic changes induced in mammary
glands as a result of aromatase overexpression can be completely abrogated
with the administration of the aromatase inhibitor, letrozole. Consistent with
complete reduction in hyperplasia, **we have also seen downregulation of
estrogen receptor and a decrease in cell proliferation** markers, suggesting
aromatase-induced hyperplasia can be treated with aromatase inhibitors. Our
studies demonstrate that **aromatase overexpression alone, without circulating
estrogen, is responsible for the induction of breast hyperplasia and these
changes can be abrogated using aromatase inhibitors.**

Ann N Y Acad Sci 1986;464:106-16. **Uptake and concentration of steroid
hormones in mammary tissues.** Thijssen JH, van Landeghem AA, Poortman J "For
estradiol the highest tissue levels were found in the malignant samples **. No
differences were seen in these levels between pre- and postmenopausal women
despite the largely different peripheral blood levels."** "Striking
differences were seen between the breast and uterine tissues for the total
tissue concentration of estradiol, the ratio between estradiol and estrone,
and the subcellular distribution of both estrogens. **At similar receptor
concentrations in the tissues these differences cannot easily be explained.**
" " **Lower concentrations of DHEAS and DHEA were observed in the malignant
tissues compared with the normal ones and the benign lesions.** "

Cancer. 1983 Jun 1;51(11):2100-4. **Elevated serum acute phase protein levels
as predictors of disseminated breast cancer.** Thompson DK, Haddow JE, Smith
DE, Ritchie RF.

Crit Care Med. 2003 Nov;31(11):2705-7. **Carbon dioxide: a "waste product"
with potential therapeutic utilities in critical care.** Torbati D.

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2000 Jun;73(3-4):141-5. **Elevated steroid
sulfatase expression in breast cancers.** Utsumi T, Yoshimura N, Takeuchi S,
Maruta M, Maeda K, Harada N. In situ estrogen synthesis makes an important
contribution to the high estrogen concentration found in breast cancer
tissues. Steroid sulfatase which hydrolyzes several sulfated steroids such as
estrone sulfate, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and cholesterol sulfate may
be involved. In the present study, we therefore, assessed steroid sulfatase
mRNA levels in breast malignancies and background tissues from 38 patients by
reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction. The levels in breast
cancer tissues were significantly increased at 1458.4+/-2119.7 attomoles/mg
RNA (mean +/- SD) as compared with 535.6+/-663.4 attomoles/mg RNA for non-
malignant tissues (P<0.001). Thus, increased steroid sulfatase expression may
be partly responsible for local overproduction of estrogen and provide a
growth advantage for tumor cells.

Fed Proc. 1980 Jun;39(8):2533-8. **Influence of endogenous opiates on anterior
pituitary function.** Van Vugt DA, Meites J.

Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1978 Jul;9(1):59-66. **Sex hormone concentrations in
post-menopausal women.** Vermeulen A, Verdonck L. Plasma sex hormone
concentrations (testosterone, (T), androstenedione (A), oestrone (E1) and
oestradiol (E2) were measured in forty post-menopausal women more than 4 years
post-normal menopause. **Sex hormone concentrations in this group of
postmenopausal women (greater than 4YPM) did not show any variation as a
function of age,** with the possible exception of E2 which showed a tendency
to decrease in the late post-menopause."

J Steroid Biochem 1984 Nov;21(5):607-12. **The endogenous concentration of
estradiol and estrone in normal human postmenopausal endometrium.** Vermeulen-
Meiners C, Jaszmann LJ, Haspels AA, Poortman J, Thijssen JH The endogenous
estrone (E1) and estradiol (E2) levels (pg/g tissue) were measured in 54
postmenopausal, atrophic endometria and compared with the E1 and E2 levels in
plasma (pg/ml). The results from the tissue levels of both steroids **showed
large variations and there was no significant correlation with their plasma
levels. The mean E2 concentration in tissue was 420 pg/g, 50 times higher than
in plasma and the E1 concentration of 270 pg/g was 9 times higher.** The E2/E1
ratio in tissue of 1.6, was higher than the corresponding E2/E1 ratio in
plasma, being 0.3. **We conclude that normal postmenopausal atrophic
endometria contain relatively high concentrations of estradiol and somewhat
lower estrone levels.** These tissue levels do not lead to histological
effects.

J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2000;(27):67-73. **Endogenous estrogens as
carcinogens through metabolic activation.** Yager JD.

Regul Pept. 2003 Jul 15;114(2-3):101-7. **Inhibition of cytosolic
phospholipase A2 mRNA expression: a novel mechanism for acetylsalicylic acid-
mediated growth inhibition and apoptosis in colon cancer cells.** Yu HG, Huang
JA, Yang YN, Luo HS, Yu JP, Meier JJ, Schrader H, Bastian A, Schmidt WE,
Schmitz.

Brain Res. 1999 Aug 28;839(2):313-22. **Opioid growth factor and organ
development in rat and human embryos.** Zagon IS, Wu Y, McLaughlin PJ.

J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17480-7. Epub 2005 Feb 22. **A novel
antiestrogenic mechanism in progesterone receptor-transfected breast cancer
cells.** Zheng ZY, Bay BH, Aw SE, Lin VC.  