**Cancer: Disorder and Energy**  

For every thing that lives is holy, life delights in life.... W. Blake

=======================

Kurt Goldstein: "Life is a condition alternating between excitation,
destruction

and unbalance, and reorganization, equilibrium and rest."

===========================

Oncological pathologists, looking at slices of a tumor, believe they can guess

when the cells have an evil intention. However, biologists studying living
cells find that

cells can do only what they are allowed to do by their environment.

===========================

**Cancer: Disorder and Energy**

According to the World Health Organization, cancer is now the leading cause of
death in

the world. Although many "causes" are known, and despite the "War on Cancer,"

nothing practical has been done to reduce the incidence of cancer. Since Nixon
started

that war, the number of people dying annually in the US has increased faster
than the

population. In ancient Rome and Egypt, cancer was rare; cancer has been
identified in

only one Egyptian mummy. In the US and several other countries, between 2002
and

2005 there was an unprecedented decline (7% in the US) in the incidence of
breast

cancer, when the medical use of estrogen decreased following the Women's
Health

Initiative report showing that estrogen caused cancer, dementia, strokes and
heart

attacks. However, when the public was reassured about estrogen's safety,
breast

cancer incidence began increasing again each year.

The cancer industry has been flexible and imaginative in ways of presenting
"age

standardized" death rates to show that they are making progress against
cancer, but

there are philosophical and scientific problems in "oncology" (i.e., the study
or treatment

of lumps) that should be considered by anyone who plans to do business with
that

profession.

In the 19th century (in Johannes Muller's lab), cancers, like other animal
tissues, were

found to be made up of cells, and by 1858, all diseases were said to be caused
by

disturbances in cells (Rudolph Virchow). The atomic and molecular theory of
matter was

becoming accepted at the time that animals were found to be made up of cells,
and in

both cases the "elementary particles" seemed to have a special power to
explain things.

This idea of a cellular basis of disease gradually displaced the old idea that
diseases

were caused by an imbalance of the body fluids, or humors. In 1863, Virchow

recognized that inflammation, involving leukocytes, was a common feature of
cancer,

but that aspect of his work was neglected for a long time.

Recent medical textbooks reveal no major change in the understanding of cancer
since

Virchow's time, except that "genes" (which weren't known during Virchow's
life)

gradually became the most important aspect of cells. The typical modern
textbook

describes the cellular disturbance of cancer as the result of an "initiating"
mutation in a

gene, which gives it the potential to develop into a cancer, if it
subsequently is exposed

to a "promoter," which causes it to multiply. In some versions of the theory,
a promoter is

a second mutation that causes proliferation, but in other versions the
promotion is

caused by chemicals binding to receptors the way hormones do, to stimulate

proliferation. Typically, textbooks (and reports of continuing research)
describe

subsequent changes in the genes that cause a cancer to progress from a simple
excess

of cells through stages of increasing malignancy: hyperplasia, dysplasia,
carcinoma in

situ, invasive cancer.

One of the reasons that the medical understanding of cancer hasn't changed

significantly since Virchow's time is that blaming misbehaving cells for
causing a tumor

fits into the older medical tradition, that has existed at least since the
time of

Hippocrates, 400 BC, which treated tumors either by cutting them out, or by
burning

them off with caustics. Virchow's identification of misbehaving cells provided
a clear

mental image of exactly what the physician must try to destroy. And it's
probably hard to

get interested in something which could seriously limit your professional
activities if it

turned out to be true.

The "cellular basis of cancer" was developed simultaneously with the germ
theory of

disease, and in the case of cancer, the deviant cells came to be considered an
alien

substance, "not-self," analogous to infective germs. Paul Ehrlich's search for
poisons

that were specific for bacterial pathogens was quickly extended to the idea of
finding

poisons that would distinguish between cancer cells and the patient's cells.

Hippocrates' therapeutic approach to cancer may have survived for 2400 years,
but the

ideas of his younger contemporary, Plato, about order and causation have
probably had

a greater effect on medicine. Plato believed that the world of experience is
inferior and

accidental, and that there are timeless "Forms" that are the real substances.
In the

atomic theory of matter, eternal, unchanging atoms took the place of platonic
forms, and

there are still molecular biologists who insist that life can only be
explained in terms of

its constituent atoms ("What else is there but atoms?"). This philosophy of
timeless

forms was a deep commitment of people like Gregor Mendel and August Weismann,

whose ideas dominated the thinking of early 20th century geneticists. Genes
were the

immutable essence of organisms, and the cells, tissues, and organs that form
the

organism are merely temporal and accidental. Weismann's "germ plasm" or germ
line

contained the immortal genes, the rest of the body lacked them, and was
essentially

mortal.

For most of the 20th century, the official doctrine was that most of the cells
of the adult

body became stationary once the body reached its adult size, and that aging
consisted

of the "wearing out" of those mortal cells. When a tumor, containing new
cells, would

appear and grow, these cells were called "immortal," because they didn't
follow the rule

for normal, stationary, mortal cells. Their "immortality" is often
demonstrated by growing

them endlessly in culture dishes. Normal cells, if they can be made to survive
in a

culture dish, are likely to be "transformed" into cancer, demonstrated by
their ability to

replicate in dishes.

This is an important ideological point, that developed as biologists were
experiencing

the extreme difficulty of getting cells to replicate, or even to survive, in
culture dishes. It

has only recently been realized that cells need more than nutritional and
hormonal

signals to survive in culture; they require certain textural, structural, even
rhythmically

repeating conditions that mimic their surroundings in the living body.

Applied to cancer, the gene theory made it seem clear that the changes
occurring in

tumor cells were irrevocable, and it has seemed self-evident to oncologists
that the only

hope the cancer patient has is for the physician to destroy every bit of the
alien

substance. The recurrence of a cancer that has been removed has been evidence
to

them that fragments had remained, or that the cancer had distributed its seeds
into

other parts of the body. This seems to be the necessary conclusion if cancer
is "caused"

by defective genes.

New ideas of causality have grown up in science beside, or within, the science
culture

that is committed to platonism, reductionism, and genetic determinism. A few
biologists,

including Ana Soto and Carlos Sonnenschein, are applying more realistic ideas
of

causality to ecological, developmental, and cancer research. They have said
(Soto, et

al., 2009) "The ecological developmental biology (eco-devo) movement rejects
the

notion that development is merely the unfolding of a genetic program." If
events such as

cancer aren't "caused by genes," understanding the causes of cancer and the

appropriate ways to treat it will require more holistic ways of looking at the
tumor's

relation to the organism, and the organism's relation to the environment.

It has been more than 40 years since experimenters demonstrated that cancer
cells

could be caused to revert to normal, by changing their environment. Harry
Rubin (2006)

has observed that cells can accumulate hundreds of mutations, and still
function

normally in the organism, but when separated and grown in a culture dish their

differences become obvious. The surrounding cells in the body are causing the

defective cells to remain normal in appearance, function, and growth behavior,
instead

of acting like cancer cells, and can also cause "stem-like" cells to
differentiate

appropriately.. He says "Intimate contact between the interacting cells is
required to

induce these changes." When stem cells enter a tumor, they don't find that
regulatory,

normalizing interaction with normal cells.

Work like Rubin's shows that even "myriad" mutations don't necessarily cause
cancer,

and another line of research shows that things which don't cause mutations can
cause

cancer--the "non-mutagenic carcinogens." The presence of mutations is neither

sufficient nor necessary for causing cancer, but tumors do eventually
accumulate

serious damage, which causes most of the tumor cells to die quickly.
Biological stress,

or excitotoxic energy deprivation, destabilizes the genome; genetic changes
develop as

a result of prolonged destructive influences. The "non-genotoxic" carcinogens
first

cause inflammation, excitation, and energy impairment, leading to fibrosis,
and atrophy.

Cycles of cell injury, death, and repair cause chromosomes to deteriorate as
the tissue

loses its organization.

When a cell is stimulated, it responds, and the response requires energy. The
stronger

and more continuous the stimulus, the more energy the cell needs to continue

responding. In some conditions, cells can desensitize themselves, to survive
in the

presence of continuous stimulation or irritation, but otherwise they are
killed when they

don't have enough energy to keep responding.

When a nerve is stimulated and responds, a wave of negative electrical charge
passes

through it; the electrical field accompanies a structural change in the
cytoplasm of the

nerve; similar changes occur in other types of cell. Stimulation of a nerve
with negative

(cathodal) polarity causes swelling, stimulation with the opposite polarity
causes the

opposite behavior; when nerve cells are inhibited, they shrink (Tasaki and
Byrne,

1980; Tasaki, et al., 1988; Tasaki, 1999).

Swelling, an increase of the water content of an area of tissue, is a general
feature of

inflammation (Weiss, et al., 1951), whether it's in a lump caused by a bee
sting, a

bruise, or hives, or a cancer. Besides the instantaneous uptake of water
described by

Tasaki, there are increases that continue because of metabolic and chemical
changes in

the irritated cell. Tasaki has used gels of synthetic polymers to demonstrate
that an

electrical field can cause these changes, without the need for the "chemical
osmotic"

changes that are customarily assumed to account for the swelling changes
caused by

stress (Tasaki, 2002). When the pH of a protein gel becomes more alkaline, it
swells.

The electrical activation of a nerve causes a quick shift towards internal
alkalinity

(Endres, et al., 1986), followed by a sudden increase in lactic acid
production. Although

increased lactic acid causes acidity of an irritated or inflamed region, the
conversion of

pyruvic acid to lactic acid causes the interior of the stressed cell to become
more

alkaline, causing it to swell. This is the same process that causes the
familiar swelling of

tired muscles.

If blood vessels swell, the delivery of oxygen may be restricted, and hypoxia
causes

more intense swelling, because more lactic acid is produced, and less
oxidized. This

swelling pressure resembles an increase of osmolarity. For over 100 years, it
has been

customary to treat shock with "isotonic" fluids, which are in balance with
well

oxygenated tissues, with approximately 290 milliosmoles per liter, but this
usually

causes edema, swelling, and weight gain. Stressed tissues have been found to
be in

balance with fluids of much higher osmolarity, for example 372 mOsm/L (Tranum-

Jensen, et al., 1981), and sometimes much higher.

Apart from its acidity, lactic acid acts as an excitatory signal. A very
slight increase

above the normal amount of lactic acid in the body fluids excites sensitive
cells, and the

amounts reached in inflamed tissues and in cancers will excite even stable
cells such as

myelinated nerves (Uchida and Murao, 1975).

Cancer cells show all the signs of being intensely stimulated, and this
includes a high

rate of oxygen consumption (deGroof, et al., 2009). The stimulation increases
the

energy requirements beyond the ability of the mitochondria's capacity to meet
them,

leading to the production of lactate even when a normal amount of oxygen is
present.

Even when both glucose and oxygen are supplied (which they usually aren't),
the tumor

cells will consume amino acids as fuel, as well as using them as material for
growth.

Tumors have been called "nitrogen traps" or "glutamine traps," but this has
meaning

beyond the use of the nitrogen for growth; it is involved in the energetic
inefficiency of

this process, and the reorganizing effects this wasteful flow of energy has on
the tissue

structure (Medina, 2001). When glutamine enters the Krebs cycle to be used as
fuel,

this interferes with the ability to oxidize glucose, causing more lactic acid
to be formed,

contributing to the excitation and increased energy requirement.

Lactic acid activates the other major mediators of inflammation, including
prostaglandins

(made from PUFA), free fatty acids (including arachidonate, that forms

prostaglandins; Schoonderwoerd, et al., 1989), nitric oxide, carbon monoxide,

proteolytic enzymes that degrade the extracellular matrix, TNF (Jensen, et
al., 1990),

hypoxia inducible factor (Lu, et al., 2002; McFate, et al., 2008), interferon,
and

interleukins. Arachidonic acid itself can increase lactate production (Meroni,
et al.,

2003). TNFalpha and interferon gamma activate lactic acid production by
increasing

prostaglandins (Taylor, et al., 1992).

Most of the present information about cancer cells' behavior, such as
reactions to

radiation and chemical toxins, has been based on the study of cells in culture
dishes.

For more than 70 years, it was generally believed that radiation caused
mutations and

cancer by directly modifying the cells' genetic material. Then, it was
discovered that

fresh cells that were added to a dish of irradiated cells also developed
mutations. The

radiation causes cells to emit excitatory, inflammatory, substances such as
serotonin

and nitric oxide, which injure the cells that are later put near them.

Applying this information to the existing knowledge that radiation induces
cancer in

animals, the doctrine of genetic determinism inferred that the radiation
"bystander

effect" is just another mechanism by which radiation produces the "mutant
cancer cell"

or clone of cancer cells. But the difference between events in vitro and in
vivo is that

cells which are injured in the organism immediately initiate a process of
healing, and in

that situation each of the substances emitted by injured cells is acting both
locally and

systemically to activate repair or regeneration of the damaged tissue. Cells
isolated in a

culture dish can't call on the organism for the necessary materials, so the
responses of

the "bystander" cells, leading to mutations and death, seem meaningless. The
injured

cells are merely toxic, rather than potentially being a stimulus to healing.

When any part of a living organism is injured, for example by x-rays or
surgery, the

emitted substances affect the endocrine and nervous systems, activating
processes that

change metabolism and behavior. The injured tissue takes on new functions, for

example by locally synthesizing estrogen, cortisol (Vukelic, et al., 2011),
and other

hormones, as well as stimulating the normal endocrine glands to secrete them.
These

interactions have been generally disregarded in cancer treatment, because of
the gene centered

theory of cancer, but they are essential for understanding the "malignancy" of

tumors, that property that makes them likely to return after the tumor has
been

destroyed, and to spread to other tissues. Has anyone ever heard of a
radiologist or

surgeon who measured estrogen or the various mediators of inflammation before,

during, and after their treatments? Long range survival after breast cancer
surgery is

affected by the time in the menstrual cycle when the surgery is done (Lemon,
et al.,

1996).

All sorts of stress, inflammation, and tissue injury increase the
concentration of

estrogen, both locally and systemically. Estrogen in turn produces hypoxia,
swelling,

lactic acid formation, and stimulates cell multiplication. Even a brief period
of hypoxia

will cause the secretion of lactate and other chemoattractants (Neumann, et
al., 1993),

which will cause cells to move into the hypoxic area from the blood stream.
Although

lactic acid attracts immune cells, it probably reduces their anticancer
functions, and it

stimulates the formation of new blood vessels, supporting continued growth and

expansion of the multiplying cells (Hirschhaeuer, et al., 2011). When a tissue
is being

repaired normally, the new cells sense a quorum, and stop multiplying. The
return of

nerves to the damaged area is part of the regenerative process; nerves have
inductive

and stabilizing effects on differentiating cells.

These complex interactions between tumor cells and the rest of the organism
are not

considered by the ideology of medical oncologists. The ruling belief is that
the

malignancy of cells can be determined by examining them microscopically, and
that

their rate of growth can be determined, and that the tumor's approximate time
of origin

can be estimated. After surgically removing a tumor, the administration of
chemotherapy

and/or radiation is governed by mathematical descriptions of the expected
behavior of

cancer cells.

The mathematical relation of mortality to aging was described by Benjamin
Gompertz,

an actuary, in 1825, based on the understanding that people become less able
to resist

dying as they get older. This Gompertzian growth curve, which is realistic
when applied

to a population of people, flies, or rabbits, was applied to tumor growth
(A.K. Laird, in

1964). Gompertz' reasoning that the probability of a person's dying increases
with age

has nothing to do with cancer cells, and there is very little evidence that
his law of

growth is useful for describing tumors. Laird's evidence consisted of 19 tumor
samples,

taken from 10 mice, 8 rats, and a rabbit. Her suggestion that the continuing
deceleration

of the growth rate might represent a natural growth regulating process wasn't
influential,

but her use of an actuarial formula, suggesting certain properties of cancer
cells, has

been extremely influential. It seems to be the profession's great need for
justification

that has made a Law of Tumor Growth so important to them.

At the time Laird did the tumor growth study, there was considerable interest
in the idea

that the immune system could be induced to prevent tumor growth. In 1951,
Chester

Southam, of the Sloan-Kettering Institute, tested his theory of cancer
immunity on

hundreds of patients and prisoners, and his results were widely reported. He
found that

pieces of tumor implanted in healthy people caused a local intense
inflammation, which

healed completely after two or three weeks. In sick people, the rejection of
the cancer

implant took about twice as long, and in people who already had cancer, the
implant

was very slow to be destroyed, and sometimes it was still present when they
died.

In 1889, Stephen Paget had noticed that cancers metastasize only into certain
organs,

and compared the cancer cells to seeds that "can only live and grow if they
fall on

congenial soil." While many people, like Southam, saw a failing "immune
system" as

part of the congenial soil, and suggested vaccination to activate an immune
rejection of

the tumor, others have suggested "reducing the soil to dust," making growth
impossible

in a more general way. Recently, this attitude has taken the form of different
ways of

"starving" cancer, by reducing sugar in the diet, or by blocking cells'
ability to use sugar.

The idea of making the "soil" inhospitable to cancer is a variation on the
theme of killing

the unwanted tissue.

As long as the lump is defined as an alien material, killing it by any means
seems

reasonable, but if it is seen as the body's attempt to repair itself, then
killing it is no more

reasonable than it would be to cut the spots out of someone with smallpox.

When a cell is dying, it emits growth stimulating signals (Huang, et al.,
2011). That's a

normal part of tissue renewal. Some of its substance guides the
differentiation of new

cells, as demonstrated long ago by Polezhaev (discussed in my previous
article, "Stem

cells, cell culture, and culture: Issues in regeneration"). Anything that
injures a tissue

enough to require cells to be replaced causes the activation of a regulatory
protein,

hypoxia-inducible factor, HIF, which inhibits mitochondrial respiration,
causing a shift

toward glycolytic metabolism, increasing substances needed for growth. HIF is
essential

to the healing of any wound. Even glucose deprivation can cause the induction
of HIF.

Prostaglandins, made from polyunsaturated fatty acids released by stimulation,
can

cause HIF to increase, but HIF also causes prostaglandins to increase. Lactic
acid

increases the expression of HIF, while HIF causes cells to shift metabolically
to depend

on converting glucose to lactic acid, that is, to adopt the "cancer
metabolism." HIF is

recognized as a fundamental problem in "cancer therapy," since HIF allows the
cancer

to resist the treatment, but the treatment increases HIF.

Radiation, chemotherapy, and surgery all activate these processes of cell
replacement,

and unless something has changed to improve the organism's recuperative
ability, it

isn't clear why the cells which replace the missing part should be more able
to

satisfactorily complete the recovery process than the original cells were.
Even the

amount of radiation in a single dental x-ray is enough to activate the
excitatory-inflammatory

processes, and a "therapeutic" x-ray to any part of the body excites similar,
but much greater, processes throughout the body. But the ideology of "the
cancer cell," and the Gompertz Growth Law, guide the practice of cancer
treatment.

Many years ago, Harry Rubin was impressed by hearing from a pathologist that
he had

been able to find diagnosable cancer somewhere in the body of every person
over the

age of 50 that he had autopsied. If everyone has cancer by the age of 50, that
means

that cancer is harmless for most people, and that small cancers might
frequently

appear, and be spontaneously removed as part of the body's regular house-
cleaning.

One of the reasons that spontaneous regression of tumors seems so rare is

undoubtedly that most tumors are quickly cut out by surgeons.

Preventing injury should be a basic consideration, but the medical slogan,
"first do no

harm," just doesn't apply to the cancer treatment industry, and this results
from the

doctrine of "the cancer cell," which is something to be destroyed or kept from

multiplying. In the process of diagnosing a cancer, and during the course of
treating it,

the patient is usually subjected to multiple x-ray examinations, sometimes
given

radioactive drugs that supposedly concentrate in hidden tumors to emit
positrons, and

often has toxic contrast agents injected even for MRI examinations. These
procedures,

even before the destructive "therapies" begin, are adding to the body's
inflammatory

burden, interfering with the body's ability to complete a healing process.
Decisions

about pain control usually disregard the effects of the drugs on tumor growth
and

general vitality--for example, the opiates stimulate histamine release, which
increases

inflammation and tumor growth.

In 1927, Bernstein and Elias found that rats eating a fat free diet had almost
no

spontaneous cancer, and many studies since then in animals and people have
shown a

close association between polyunsaturated fatty acids and cancer. The
polyunsaturated

fatty acids in themselves, and their breakdown products, are excitatory and
destabilizing

to normal cells, but by modifying the sensitivity and energy production of
cells, they limit

cells' ability to respond to stimulation and destabilizing influences.
Although they aren't

essential for wound healing (Porras-Reyes, et al., 1992), they and their
metabolites, the

prostaglandins, are very conspicuous in wounds and tumors, and their
proportion

generally increases with aging. The prostaglandins are involved in several
vicious

cycles, including that with HIF mentioned above. This makes the PUFA and

prostaglandins important to consider in relation to optimizing wound healing,
and

decreasing cancerization. Aspirin's protective and therapeutic effects in
cancer are

starting to be recognized, but there are several other things that can
synergize with

aspirin to reduce the circulation of free fatty acids and their conversion to

prostaglandins. Niacinamide, progesterone, sugar, carbon dioxide, and red
light protect

against both free fatty acids and prostaglandins.

Since excitation leads to intracellular alkalinity and swelling, reducing the
excitation

seems reasonable, and many things which protect cells against excitation also
have

demonstrated anticancer effects. Local anesthetics, antihistamines, and
antiinflammatory

substances and some anesthetics such as xenon (Weigt, et al., 2009) are safe.
Inhibitory substances related to GABA are being investigated for their ability
to stop tumor growth. Simply stopping excessive excitation tends to restore
the dominance of oxidative respiration over glycolysis.

To restore the supply of oxygen, sugar, and nutrients, swelling must be
stopped.

Hyperosmotic fluids act directly on swollen cells, removing water. Stopping
excitation

allows a return to efficient metabolism and reduces the injury potential,
allowing the pH

to decrease; with lower pH, the cell releases some of its water.

Increasing carbon dioxide lowers the intracellular pH, as well as inhibiting
lactic acid

formation, and restoring the oxidation of glucose increases CO2. Inhibiting
carbonic

anhydrase, to allow more CO2 to stay in the cell, contributes to intracellular
acidification,

and by systemically increasing carbon dioxide this inhibition has a broad
range of

protective anti-excitatory effects. The drug industry is now looking for
chemicals that will

specifically inhibit the carbonic anhydrase enzymes that are active in tumors.
Existing

carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, such as acetazolamide, will inhibit those
enzymes,

without harming other tissues. Aspirin has some effect as an inhibitor of
carbonic

anhydrase (Bayram, et al., 2008). Since histamine, serotonin (Vullo, et al.,
2007), and

estrogen (Barnett, et al., 2008; Garg, 1975) are carbonic anhydrase
activators, their

antagonists would help to acidify the hypoxic cells. Testosterone (Suzuki, et
al., 1996)

and progesterone are estrogen antagonists that inhibit carbonic anhydrase.

With aging, cells have less ability to produce energy, and are often more
easily

stimulated. The accumulation of polyunsaturated fats is one of the factors
that reduce

the ability of mitochondria to produce energy (Zhang, et al., 2006, 2009;
Yazbeck, et al.,

1989). Increased estrogen exposure, decreased thyroid hormone, an increased
ratio of

iron to copper, and lack of light, are other factors that impair the
cytochrome oxidase

enzyme.

The increased intracellular alkalinity and intracellular calcium that result
from the

combination of those factors increase the tendency of cells to be
overstimulated,

leading to aerobic glycolysis, the cancer metabolism. Improving any part of
the system

tends to increase carbon dioxide and decrease lactate, permitting
differentiated

functioning.

There are many people currently recommending fish oil (or other highly
unsaturated

oils) for preventing or treating cancer, and it has become almost as common to

recommend a sugar free diet, "because sugar feeds cancer." This is often,
incorrectly,

said to be the meaning of Warburg's demonstration that cancer cells have a
respiratory

defect that causes them to produce lactic acid from glucose even in the
presence of

oxygen. Cancer cells use glucose and the amino acid glutamine primarily for
synthetic

purposes, and use fats as their energy source;the growth stimulating effect of
the

"essential fatty acids" (Sueyoshi and Nagao, 1962a; Holley, et al., 1974)
shows that

depriving a tumor of those fats retards its growth. The great energetic
inefficiency of the

cancer metabolism, which causes it to produce a large amount of heat and to
cause

systemic stress, failure of immunity, and weight loss, is because it
synthesizes fat from

glucose and amino acids, and then oxidizes the fat as if it were diabetic.

Estrogen, which is responsible for the fact that women burn fatty acids more
easily than

men, is centrally involved in this metabolic inefficiency. When a tissue is
exposed to

estrogen, within minutes it takes up water, and begins to synthesize fat, with
a tendency

to produce lactic acid at the same time. The alkalizing effect of lactic acid
production is

apparently what accounts for the uptake of water. Since it takes longer, at
least 30

minutes, to produce a significant amount of new enzymes, these early changes
are

explained by the activation of existing enzymes by estrogen.

The transhydrogenases, or the transhydrogenase function of the steroid

dehydrogenases, which shift metabolic energy between glycolytic and oxidative

systems, have been shown to explain these effects of estrogen, but the

transhydrogenases can be activated by many stressors. The biological function
of the

transhydrogenases seems to be to allow cells to continue growth and repair
processes

in a hypoxic environment. Estrogen can start the process by creating new
pathways for

electrons, and will promote processes that are started by something else, and

progesterone is estrogen's natural antagonist, terminating the process.

Recently, a group at Johns Hopkins University (Le, et al., 2012) has been
working out

the implications of this ability to change the metabolism under hypoxia: Using
an

isotope-labeled amino acid, ". . . glutamine import and metabolism through the
TCA

cycle persisted under hypoxia, and glutamine contributed significantly to
citrate

carbons. Under glucose deprivation, glutamine-derived fumarate, malate, and

citrate were significantly increased." The implication of this is that if the
tumor isn't

supplied with sugar, it will increase the rate at which it consumes the host's
proteins.

Forty years ago the work of Shapot and Blinov was showing the same effect,
except

that they demonstrated the involvement of the whole organism, especially the
liver, in

interaction with the tumor (Blinov and Shapot, 1975).

The alkaline cancer cell surrounds itself by the acid that it emits, and this
extracellular

acidity increases the ability of fatty acids to enter the cell (Spector,
1969); cancer cells,

although they are synthesizing fat, also avidly take it up from their
environment

(Sueyoshi and Nagao, 1962b). This fat avidity is so extreme that cancer cells
in vitro will

eat enough polyunsaturated fat to kill themselves. This has been offered as
proof that

fish oil kills cancer. Saturated fats, however, have a calming effect on
cancer cells,

inhibiting their aerobic glycolysis (Marchut, et al., 1986) while permitting
them to resume

the respiratory production of energy.

The foods that nourish the patient well enough to support healing while
permitting

energy reserves to be built up are also the foods that don't interfere with
the hormones,

that don't cause spurious excitation of the tissues. The polyunsaturated fats
directly

stimulate the stress hormones, activate the excitatory amino acid signals, and
directly

excite cells, while the saturated fats have opposite effects, and are anti-
inflammatory,

and also don't interfere with mitochondrial function. When we eat more
carbohydrate

than can be oxidized, some of it will be turned into saturated fats and
omega-9 fats, and

these will support mitochondrial energy production. Carbohydrates in the diet
also help

to decrease the mobilization of fatty acids from storage; niacinamide and
aspirin support

that effect. Sugars are probably more favorable than starches for the immune
system

(Harris, et al., 1999), and failure of the immune system is a common feature
of cancer.

Polyunsaturated fats are generally known to suppress the immune system. Foods
that

provide generous amounts of sodium, calcium, magnesium, and potassium, help to

minimize stress. Trace minerals and vitamins are important, but can be harmful
if used

excessively--iron excess is important to avoid.

Emodin, an anti-inflammatory substance found in cascara sagrada bark and other

plants, is similar to other molecules that have been used for treating cancer,
and one of

its effects is to lower HIF: "Consistently, emodin attenuated the expression
of

cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), VEGF, hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 **!**
), MMP-1

and MMP-13 at mRNA level in IL-1 **"** and LPS-treated synoviocytes under
hypoxia" (Ha,

et al., 2011). MMP-1 and MMP-13 are collagenase enzymes involved in
metastasis.

When cells are fully nourished, supplied with protective hormones, and
properly

illuminated, their ability to communicate should be able to govern their
movements,

preventing--and possibly reversing--metastatic migration.

REFERENCES

Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;68(9):3505-15. Estrogen receptor regulation of carbonic

anhydrase XII through a distal enhancer in breast cancer. Barnett DH, Sheng S,
Charn

TH, Waheed A, Sly WS, Lin CY, Liu ET, Katzenellenbogen BS.

Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Oct 15;16(20):9101-5.In vitro inhibition of salicylic
acid

derivatives on human cytosolic carbonic anhydrase isozymes I and II. Bayram E,

Senturk M, Kufrevioglu OI, Supuran CT.

Int J Cancer. 1984 Oct 15;34(4):529-33. Effect of dietary stearic acid on the
genesis

of spontaneous mammary adenocarcinomas in strain A/ST mice. Bennett AS.

Zeitschr. Krebsforsch. 28(1), 1-14, 1. Lipoids and carcinoma growth,
Bernstein, S.

and Elias, H.

Vopr Onkol. 1974;20(12):60-5. [Role of gluconeogenesis in the maintenance of

normoglycemia in the body of animals with transplanted tumors]. [Article in

Russian] Blinov VA, Shapot VS.

Bull Exp Biol Med. 1975 Jan;77(7):770-2. Hyperglycemia and gluconeogenesis in

the liver of mice with tumors. Blinov VA, Shapot VS. Gluconeogenesis, when
sharply

stimulated by exhaustion of the liver glycogen reserves, is one of the factors
maintaining

the normal blood sugar level in mice with tumors. Hyperglycemia induce by
glucose

leads to an increase in the liver glycogen content and a decrease in the
intensity of

gluconeogenesis in control mice with tumors. Only in the latter, however, does
glycogen

synthesis from noncarbohydrate compounds rise again steadily after the
injections of

glucose are discontinued.

Minerva Ginecol. 2010 Dec;62(6):573-83. Extranuclear signaling by estrogen:
role in

breast cancer progression and metastasis. Cortez V, Mann M, Brann DW,
Vadlamudi

RK.

J Steroid Biochem. 1987 Jun;26(6):679-85. Cooxidation of steroidal and
nonsteroidal

estrogens by purified prostaglandin synthase results in a stimulation of

prostaglandin formation. Degen GH, McLachlan JA, Eling TE, Sivarajah K.

Mol Cancer. 2009 Jul 31;8:54. Increased OXPHOS activity precedes rise in

glycolytic rate in H-RasV12/E1A transformed fibroblasts that develop a Warburg

phenotype. de Groof AJ, te Lindert MM, van Dommelen MM, Wu M, Willemse M,
Smift

AL, Winer M, Oerlemans F, Pluk H, Fransen JA, Wieringa B.

Can J Biochem. 1972 May;50(5):447-56. Pyridine-adenine dinucleotide

transhydrogenase activity in cells cultured from rat hepatoma. De Luca C,
Gioeli

RP.

J Clin Invest. 1966 Aug;45(8):1268-72. Pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase in

normal human and leukemic leukocytes. Evans AE, Kaplan NO.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1975 Feb;192(2):297-302. Induction of hepatic carbonic

anhydrase by estrogen. Garg LC.

Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(9):1432-7. Emodin inhibits proinflammatory responses

and inactivates histone deacetylase 1 in hypoxic rheumatoid synoviocytes. Ha

MK, Song YH, Jeong SJ, Lee HJ, Jung JH, Kim B, Song HS, Huh JE, Kim SH.

Eur J Cancer. 1977 Aug;13(8):793-800. Alkalotic disequilibrium in patients
with

solid tumors: rediscovery of an old finding. Harguindey S, Speir WA, Kolbeck
RC,

Bransome ED.

J Surg Res. 1999 Apr;82(2):339-45. Diet-induced protection against

lipopolysaccharide includes increased hepatic NO production. Harris HW, Rockey

DC, Young DM, Welch WJ.

J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 23;286(51):44177-86. A dormant state modulated by
osmotic

pressure controls clonogenicity of prostate cancer cells. Havard M, Dautry F,

Tchenio T.

Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jan 12;352(2):437-43. Non-hypoxic induction

of HIF-3alpha by 2-deoxy-D-glucose and insulin. Heidbreder M, Qadri F, Johren
O,

Dendorfer A, Depping R, Frohlich F, Wagner KF, Dominiak P.

Surg Forum. 1958;9:614-9. An estradiol sensitive transhydrogenase in normal
and

malignant breast tissue. Hershey FB.

Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 15;71(22):6921-5. Lactate: a metabolic key player in

cancer.Hirschhaeuser F, Sattler UG, Mueller-Klieser W.

Am J Physiol Cell Physiol May 2000 vol. 278 no. 5, Hypertonic perfusion
inhibits

intracellular Na and Ca accumulation in hypoxic myocardium. Ho HS, Liu H, Cala

PM, and Anderson SE.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1974 Oct;71(10):3976-8. Control of growth of a tumor
cell

by linoleic acid. Holley RW, Baldwin JH, Kiernan JA. "The growth of mouse
myeloma

XS 63.5 cells in cell culture is dependent on serum. Among the several growth
factors

present in serum, the lipid fraction is highly active. The growth factor(s)
provided by

the serum lipid fraction can be replaced by unsaturated fatty acids."

Nat Med. 2011 Jul 3;17(7):860-6. Caspase 3-medxiated stimulation of tumor cell

repopulation during cancer radiotherapy. Huang Q, Li F, Liu X, Li W, Shi W,
Liu FF,

O'Sullivan B, He Z, Peng Y, Tan AC, Zhou L, Shen J, Han G, Wang XJ, Thorburn
J,

Thorburn A, Jimeno A, Raben D, Bedford JS, Li CY. "In cancer treatment,
apoptosis is a

well-recognized cell death mechanism through which cytotoxic agents kill tumor

cells. Here we report that dying tumor cells use the apoptotic process to
generate

potent growth-stimulating signals to stimulate the repopulation of tumors

undergoing radiotherapy."

J Surg Res. 1990 Oct;49(4):350-3. Lactic acidosis increases tumor necrosis
factor

secretion and transcription in vitro. Jensen JC, Buresh C, Norton JA.

J Biol Chem. 1969 Aug 25;244(16):4413-21. Human placental 17 beta-estradiol

dehydrogenase. IV. Differentiation of 17 beta-estradiol-activated

transhydrogenase from the transhydrogenase function of 17 beta-estradiol

dehydrogenase. Karavolas HJ, Orr JC, Engel LL.

Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2011;32(4):380-8. Immunotherapy of cervical cancer as a

biological dissipative structure. Klimek R, Klimek M, Jasiczek D.

BMC Cancer. 2010 Jun 7;10:263. The microenvironment determines the breast

cancer cells' phenotype: organization of MCF7 cells in 3D cultures. Krause S,

Maffini MV, Soto AM, Sonnenschein C.

Biosci Rep. 2012 Feb;32(1):91-104. Anti-neoplastic action of aspirin against a
T-cell

lymphoma involves an alteration in the tumour microenvironment and regulation

of tumour cell survival. Kumar A, Vishvakarma NK, Tyagi A, Bharti AC, Singh
SM.

ANL Rep. 1963 May:216-22. Dynamics of tumor growth. ANL-6723. Laird AK.

Br J Cancer. 1964 Sep;13:490-502. Dynamics of tumor growth. Laird AK.

Cell Metab. 2012 Jan 4;15(1):110-21. Glucose-independent glutamine metabolism

via TCA cycling for proliferation and survival in B cells. Le A, Lane AN,
Hamaker M,

Bose S, Gouw A, Barbi J, Tsukamoto T, Rojas CJ, Slusher BS, Zhang H, Zimmerman

LJ, Liebler DC, Slebos RJ, Lorkiewicz PK, Higashi RM, Fan TW, Dang CV. "Using
[U-

(13)C,(15)N]-glutamine as the tracer, glutamine import and metabolism through

the TCA cycle persisted under hypoxia, and glutamine contributed significantly
to

citrate carbons. Under glucose deprivation, glutamine-derived fumarate,
malate,

and citrate were significantly increased."

Steroids. 2012 Jan 28. Calcium-induced activation of estrogen receptor alpha--
New

insight.Leclercq G.

Nebr Med J. 1996 Apr;81(4):110-5. Timing of breast cancer surgery during the
luteal

menstrual phase may improve prognosis. Lemon HM, Rodriguez-Sierra JF.

Oncogene. 2012 Jan 23. RhoA triggers a specific signaling pathway that
generates

transforming microvesicles in cancer cells. Li B, Antonyak MA, Zhang J,
Cerione

RA. Ralph SJ: ; Milsom C; Chang YW.

J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 20;277(51):50081-6. Prostaglandin E2 induces
hypoxiainducible

factor-1alpha stabilization and nuclear localization in a human prostate

cancer cell line. Liu XH, Kirschenbaum A, Lu M, Yao S, Dosoretz A, Holland JF,
Levine

AC.

Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 1;67(19):9013-7. Loss of the mitochondrial bioenergetic

capacity underlies the glucose avidity of carcinomas. López-Ríos F, Sánchez-
Aragó M,

García-García E, Ortega AD, Berrendero JR, Pozo-Rodríguez F, L ópez-Encuentra
A, Ballestín C, Cuezva

JM.

J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23111-5. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1
activation by

aerobic glycolysis implicates the Warburg effect in carcinogenesis. Lu H,
Forbes

RA, Verma A.

Acta Biochimica Polonica (1986) 33(1), 7-16. The inhibitory effect of various
fatty

acids on aerobic glycolysis in Ehrlich ascites tumour cells. Marchut E,
GumiÅ„ska

M, Kedryna T.

J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 15;283(33):22700-8. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex

activity controls metabolic and malignant phenotype in cancer cells. McFate T,

Mohyeldin A, Lu H, Thakar J, Henriques J, Halim ND, Wu H, Schell MJ, Tsang TM,

Teahan O, Zhou S, Califano JA, Jeoung NH, Harris RA, Verma A.

Lasers Surg Med. 2010 Aug;42(6):489-93. Effect of Ga-Al-As laser irradiation
on

COX-2 and cPLA2-alpha expression in compressed human periodontal ligament

cells. Mayahara K, Yamaguchi A, Sakaguchi M, Igarashi Y, Shimizu N.

Circ Shock. 1990 Aug;31(4):407-18. Capillary narrowing in hemorrhagic shock is

rectified by hyperosmotic saline-dextran reinfusion. Mazzoni MC, Borgstrom P,

Intaglietta M, Arfors KE.

Journal of Nutrition. 2001;131:2539S-2542S. Glutamine and Cancer, Medina MÃ.

Int J Androl. 2003 Oct;26(5):310-7. Possible role of arachidonic acid in the

regulation of lactate production in rat Sertoli cells. Meroni SB, Riera MF,
Pellizzari

EH, Schteingart HF, Cigorraga SB.

Biofizika. 1967 Nov-Dec;12(6):1085-6. [Increase in unsaturated fatty acids
during

tumor growth]. [Article in Russian] NeÄfakh

EA, Lankin VZ.

Br Heart J. 1993 Jul;70(1):27-34. Cardiac release of chemoattractants after

ischaemia induced by coronary balloon angioplasty. Neumann FJ, Richardt G,

Schneider M, Ott I, Haupt HM, Tillmanns H, SchÃ¶mig A, Rauch B.

J Steroid Biochem 1986 May;24(5):1033-9. Aromatase activity and concentrations
of

cortisol, progesterone and testosterone in breast and abdominal adipose

tissue. Newton CJ, Samuel DL, James VH.

J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2005 Aug;60(8):970-5. Coenzyme Q10 protects
from

aging-related oxidative stress and improves mitochondrial function in heart of

rats fed a polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA)-rich diet. Ochoa JJ, Quiles JL,
Huertas

JR, Mataix J.

J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2007 Nov;62(11):1211-8. Effect of lifelong
coenzyme

Q10 supplementation on age-related oxidative stress and mitochondrial function

in liver and skeletal muscle of rats fed on a polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA)-rich

diet. Ochoa JJ, Quiles JL, Lopez-Frias M, Huertas JR, Mataix J.

Br J Cancer. 2007 Dec 3;97(11):1505-12. In vitro irradiation of basement
membrane

enhances the invasiveness of breast cancer cells. Paquette B, Baptiste C,
Therriault

H, Arguin G, Plouffe B, Lemay R.

Br J Cancer. 2011 Aug 9;105(4):534-41. Radiation-enhancement of MDA-MB-231

breast cancer cell invasion prevented by a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor.
Paquette

B, Therriault H, Desmarais G, Wagner R, Royer R, Bujold R.

Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 1992 Apr;45(4):293-8. Essential
fatty acids

are not required for wound healing. Porras-Reyes BH, Schreiner GF, Lefkowith
JB,

Mustoe TA.

Cancer Res. 1957 Dec;17(11):1112-9. Comparison of transhydrogenase and

pyridine nucleotide-cytochrome c reductase activities in rat liver and
Novikoff

hepatoma. Reynafarje B, Potter VR.

Bioessays. 2006 May;28(5):515-24. What keeps cells in tissues behaving
normally

in the face of myriad mutations? Rubin H.

Enzymologia. 1966 Apr 30;30(4):237-42. [Occurrence of pyridine nucleotide

transhydrogenase in mitochondria of various ascites tumors] [Article in
German]

Salvenmoser F, Kramar R, Seelich F.

Basic Res Cardiol. 1989 Mar-Apr;84(2):165-73. Enhanced lipolysis of myocardial

triglycerides during low-flow ischemia and anoxia in the isolated rat

heart. Schoonderwoerd K, Broekhoven-Schokker S, Hulsmann WC, Stam H.

Naturwissenschaften. 1965 Jun;52:307-8. On the effect of
NADPH2-NADtranshydrogenase

on direct oxidation of glucose; experiments with the use of

Ehrlich ascites tumor homogenates. Seelich F, Salvenmoser F, Kramar R.

J Endocrinol 1998 Sep;158(3):401-7. Progesterone inhibits
glucocorticoiddependent

aromatase induction in human adipose fibroblasts. Schmidt M, Renner

C, Loffler G.

Cancer Res. 1974 Aug;34(8):1827-32. Blood glucose levels and gluconeogenesis
in

animals bearing transplantable tumors. Shapot VS, Blinov VA.

EMBO J. 2007 Mar 21;26(6):1713-25. Structures and physiological roles of 13

integral lipids of bovine heart cytochrome c oxidase. Shinzawa-Itoh K, Aoyama
H,

Muramoto K, Terada H, Kurauchi T, Tadehara Y, Yamasaki A, Sugimura T, Kurono
S,

Tsujimoto K, Mizushima T, Yamashita E, Tsukihara T, Yoshikawa S.

Semin Cancer Biol. 2008 Oct;18(5):372-7. Theories of carcinogenesis: an
emerging

perspective. Sonnenschein C, Soto AM.

Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4334-7. The death of the cancer cell.
Sonnenschein C,

Soto AM.

J Lipid Res. 1969 Mar;10(2):207-15. Influence of pH of the medium on free
fatty acid

utilization by isolated mammalian cells. Spector AA.

Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 Jan;8(1):31-5. Inflammation, but not hypoxia, mediated

HIF-1alpha activation depends on COX-2. Stasinopoulos I, O'Brien DR, Bhujwalla

ZM.

Cancer Res. 1965 Aug;25(7):957-61. Hepatic lipids in tumor-bearing (glioma)

mice. Stein AA, Opalka E, Rosenblum I.

Adv Exp Med Biol. 2004;559:325-30. Cell swelling-induced peptide hormone

secretion. Strbak V, Benicky J, Greer SE, Bacova Z, Najvirtova M, Greer MA.

Allergy. 2011 Mar;66(3):341-50. Treatment of mast cells with carbon dioxide

suppresses degranulation via a novel mechanism involving repression of

increased intracellular calcium levels. Strider JW, Masterson CG, Durham PL.

Keio J Med. 1962 Dec;11:223-5. The influence of linoleum acid upon the growth
of

transplanted sarcoma, Sueyoshi Y and Nagao Y.

Keio J. Med. 1962;11(1):25-32. Studies on the linoleum acid contents in the

phospholipids of the sarcoma, Sueyoshi Y and Nagao Y.

Comp Biochem Physiol C Pharmacol Toxicol Endocrinol. 1996 Jun;114(2):

105-12. Effect of testosterone on carbonic anhydrase and MG(2+)-dependent

HCO3-stimulated ATPase activities in rat kidney: comparison with estradiol

effect. Suzuki S, Yoshida J, Takahashi T.

Arch Biochem Biophys. 1991 Aug 15;289(1):33-8. A possible mechanism of

mitochondrial dysfunction during cerebral ischemia: inhibition of
mitochondrial

respiration activity by arachidonic acid. Takeuchi Y, Morii H, Tamura M,
Hayaishi O,

Watanabe Y.

Int J Cancer. 2012 Jan 1;130(1):159-69. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25990. Sugars in diet
and

risk of cancer in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study. Tasevska N, Jiao L,
Cross AJ,

Kipnis V, Subar AF, Hollenbeck A, Schatzkin A, Potischman N.

Circ Shock. 1992 Jun;37(2):105-10. Inflammatory cytokines stimulate glucose

uptake and glycolysis but reduce glucose oxidation in human dermal fibroblasts

in vitro. Taylor DJ, Faragher EB, Evanson JM.

Acta Biol Med Ger. 1966;16(4):364-71. [The effect of higher fatty acids on the

energy metabolism of Ehrlich-ascites tumor cells. I. The effect of saturated
and

transconfigurated unsaturated fatty acids on anaerobic glycolysis]. [Article
in

German] Theise H.

Am J Physiol. 1975 Jan;228(1):27-33. Acid-induced excitation of afferent
cardiac

sympathetic nerve fibers. Uchida Y, Murao S.

J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10265-75. Cortisol synthesis in epidermis is

induced by IL-1 and tissue injury. Vukelic S, Stojadinovic O, Pastar I, Rabach
M,

Krzyzanowska A, Lebrun E, Davis SC, Resnik S, Brem H, Tomic-Canic M.

Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Aug 1;17(15):4107-12. Carbonic anhydrase
activators:

activation of the human isoforms VII (cytosolic) and XIV (transmembrane) with

amino acids and amines. Vullo D, Innocenti A, Nishimori I, Scozzafava A, Kaila
K,

Supuran CT.

Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011 Dec;55(12):1745-58. GABA (ÎÑ-aminobutyric acid), a
nonprotein

amino acid counters the ÎÇ-adrenergic cascade-activated oncogenic

signaling in pancreatic cancer: a review of experimental evidence. Al-Wadei
HA,

Ullah MF, Al-Wadei M.

Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2011 Dec 22. Bioenergetic Origins of
Complexity

and Disease. Wallace DC. "The organizing power of energy flow is hypothesized
to be

the origin of biological complexity and its decline the basis of "complex"
diseases and

aging."

Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2009;69(4):429-40. Xenon blocks AMPA and NMDA

receptor channels by different mechanisms. Weigt HU, Fohr KJ, Georgieff M,

Georgieff EM, Senftleben U, Adolph O.

Neuroscience. 2010 Dec 15;171(3):859-68. Low energy laser light (632.8 nm)

suppresses amyloid-ÎÇ peptide-induced oxidative and inflammatory responses in

astrocytes. Yang X, Askarova S, Sheng W, Chen JK, Sun AY, Sun GY, Yao G, Lee
JC.

Comp Biochem Physiol A. 1989;94(2):273-6. The effects of essential fatty acid

deficiency on brown adipose tissue activity in rats maintained at thermal

neutrality. Yazbeck J, Goubern M, Senault C, Chapey MF, Portet R.

Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 May;290(5):C1321-33. Polyunsaturated fatty
acids

mobilize intracellular Ca2+ in NT2 human teratocarcinoma cells by causing

release of Ca2+ from mitochondria. Zhang BX, Ma X, Zhang W, Yeh CK, Lin A, Luo
J, Sprague

EA, Swerdlow RH, Katz MS.

PLoS One. 2009 Jun 26;4(6):e6048. Linoleic acid-induced mitochondrial Ca(2+)

efflux causes peroxynitrite generation and protein nitrotyrosylation. Zhang
HM,

Dang H, Yeh CK, Zhang BX.

Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Nov;301(5):H1882-90. Dihydrotestosterone

attenuates hypoxia inducible factor-1Î± and cyclooxygenase-2 in cerebral
arteries

during hypoxia or hypoxia with glucose deprivation. Zuloaga KL, Gonzales RJ.