A R T I C L E Food-junk and some mystery ailments: Fatigue, Alzheimer's,
Colitis, Immunodeficiency. Years ago, I noticed that Oregon was one of the few
states that still had real whipping cream and cottage cheese without
additives, so I have been trustingly using cream in my coffee every day. Last
week, I noticed that my cream listed carrageenan in its ingredients. Over the
years, I have avoided carrageenan-containing foods such as apple cider, hot
dogs, most ice creams and prepared sauces and jellies, because they caused me
to have serious allergic symptoms. Carrageenan has been found to cause colitis
and anaphylaxis in humans, but it is often present in baby “formulas” and a
wide range of milk products, with the result that many people have come to
believe that it was the milk-product that was responsible for their allergic
symptoms. Because the regulators claim that it is a safe natural substance, it
is very likely that it sometimes appears in foods that don’t list it on the
label, for example when it is part of another ingredient. In the 1940s,
carrageenan, a polysaccharide made from a type of seaweed, was recognized as a
dangerous allergen. Since then it has become a standard laboratory material to
use to produce in-flammatory tumors (granulomas), immunodeficiency, arthritis,
and other in-flammations. It has also become an increasingly common material
in the food industry. Articles are often written to praise its usefulness and
to claim that it doesn't produce cancer in healthy animals. Its presence in
food, like that of the polyester imitation fat, microcrystalline cellulose,
and many other polymers used to stabilize emulsions or to increase smoothness,
is often justified by the doctrine that these molecules are too large to be
absorbed. There are two points that are deliberately ignored by the food-
safety regulators, 1) these materials can interact dangerously with intestinal
bacteria, and 2) they can be absorbed, in the process called "persorption."
The sulfites (sodium bisulfite, potassium metabisulfite, etc.) have been used
as preservatives in foods and drugs for a long time, even though they were
known to cause intense allergic reactions in some people. Fresh vegetables and
fish, dried fruits, ham and other preserved meats, hominy, pickles, canned
vegetables and juices, and wines were commonly treated with large amounts of
the sulfites to prevent darkening and the development of unpleasant odors.
People with asthma were known to be more sensitive than other people, but the
sulfites could cause a fatal asthma-like attack even in someone who had never
had asthma. Even when this was known, drugs used to treat asthma were
preserved with sulfites. Was the information just slow to reach the people who
made the products? No, the manufacturers knew about the deadly nature of their
products, but they kept on selling them. The FDA didn't answer letters on the
subject, and medical magazines such as J.A.M.A. declined to publish even brief
letters seriously discussing the issue. Obviously, since many people died from
what the drug companies called "paradoxical bronchoconstriction" when they
used the products, the drug companies had to be protected from lawsuits, and
the medical magazines and the government regulators did that through the
control of information. I think a similar situation exists now in relation to
the effects of carrageenan. Stress and anxiety sharply reduce the circulation
of blood to the intestine and liver. Prolonged stress damages the ability of
the in-testinal cells to exclude large molecules. Local irritation and
inflammation of the intestine also increase its permeability and decrease its
ability to exclude harmful materials. But even the normal intestine is able to
permit the passage of large molecules and particles, in many cases particles
larger than the cells that line the intestine; this persorption of particles
has been demonstrated using particles of plastic, starch grains which are
sometimes several times larger than blood cells, and many other materials,
including carrageenan. One of the reasons it has been easy to convince the
public that persorption doesn't happen is that there is a powerful myth in our
culture about the existence of a "semipermeable" "plasma membrane" on cells
through which only certain specific substances may pass. About 30 years ago
some biologists made a movie of living cells under the microscope, showing an
ameboid cell entering another cell, swimming around, and leaving, without
encountering any perceptible resistance; persorption of food particles, moving
in one side of a cell and out the other, wouldn't seem so mysterious if more
people had seen films of that sort. Also in the 1960s, Gerhard Volkheimer
rediscovered the phenomenon of persorption, which had been demonstrated a
century earlier. Starch grains, or other hard particles, can be found in the
blood, urine, and other fluids after they have been ingested. The iodine stain
for starch, and the characteristic shape of the granules, makes their
observation very easy. The absorption of immunologically intact proteins and
other particles has been demonstrated many times, but myth is more important
than fact; all of my biol-ogy professors, for example, denied that proteins
could be absorbed by any part of the digestive system. The accepted
description of the absorption of chylomicrons, tiny particles of fat, helps to
understand the way medical professors think about the intestine. These
particles, they say, are disassembled by the intestine cells on one side,
their molecular parts are taken up by the cells, and similar particles are
excreted out the other side of the cells, into the lymphatic vessels. As they
visualize one of these cells, it consists of at least four barriers, with each
theoretical cell surface membrane consisting of an outer water-compatible
phase, in intramembranal lipid region, and an inner water-compatible phase
where the membrane rests on the “cell contents.” Endocytosis, for example the
ingestion of a bacterial particle by a phagocyte, is described in a similar
way, to avoid any breach in the “lipid bilayer membrane.” This mental armature
has made it essentially impossible for the biomedical culture to assimilate
the facts of persorption, which would have led 150 years ago to the scientific
study of allergy and immunology in relation to the digestive system.
Volkheimer found that mice fed raw starch aged at an abnormally fast rate, and
when he dissected the starch-fed mice, he found a multitude of starch-grain-
blocked arterioles in every organ, each of which caused the death of the cells
that depended on the blood supplied by that arteriole. It isn’t hard to see
how this would affect the functions of organs such as the brain and heart,
even without considering the immunological and other implications of the
presence of foreign particles randomly distributed through the tissue. In 1979
some of my students in Mexico wanted a project to do in the lab. Since several
traditional foods are made with corn that has been boiled in alkali, I thought
it would be valuable to see whether this treatment reduced the ability of the
starch grains to be persorbed. For breakfast one day, they ate only atole,
tamales, and tortillas, all made from the alkali treated corn. None of the
students could find any starch grains after centrifuging their blood and
urine. That led me to substitute those foods whenever possible for other
starches. I have written previously about some of the environmental factors,
including radiation, estrogens, and unsaturated fats, that are known to damage
the immune system and the brain, and that we have been increasingly exposed to
since 1940. To better understand the nature of the diseases that are now
becoming so common, we can look at them in a series, from the bowel, to the
liver, to the immune system, and to the brain and hormones. The incidence of
several inflammatory diseases, for example Crohn's disease, a chronic
inflammation of the intestine, has been increasing during the last 50 years in
the industrialized countries, and at the same time, the incidence of several
liver diseases has also been increasing. The entry of bacteria into the blood
stream, which can lead to septicemia, is ordinarily considered to be of
importance only in extreme immunodeficiency states, such as old age or in
premature infants, but the death rate of young adults from septicemia has been
increasing rapidly since the 1940s. The permeability of the intestine that
allows bacteria to enter the blood stream is very serious if the phagocytic
cells are weakened. Carrageenan poisoning is one known cause of the
disappearance of macrophages. Its powerful immunosuppression would tend to be
superimposed onto the immunological damage that has been produced by
radiation, unsaturated fats, and estrogens. The liver tumor that is
characteristic of young women using the oral contraceptive pill is a
hepatocellular adenoma, which is considered to be a premalignant tumor. In
Japan, Mexico, and several European countries, the incidence of hepatocellular
tu-mors has increased steadily and tremendously in recent decades, and it has
increased in men as well as in women. This is the sort of tumor that very
likely represents an increased burden of toxins absorbed from the bowel.
Carrageenan contributes to the disappearance of the liver enzymes (the
cytochrome P-450 system) that detoxify drugs, hormones, and a variety of other
chemicals. Carrageenan enters even the intact, uninflamed gut, and damages
both chemical defenses and immunological defenses. When it has produced
inflammatory bowel damage, the amount absorbed will be greater, as will the
absorption of bacterial endotoxin. Carra-geenan and endotoxin synergize in
many ways, including their effects on nitric oxide, prostaglandins, toxic free
radicals, and the defensive enzyme systems. The continuing efficient
production of energy is a basic aspect of metabolic defense, and this is
interrupted by carrageenan and endotoxin. The energy failure becomes part of a
vicious circle, in which permeability of the intestine is increased by the
very factors that it should exclude. Once the protective barrier-functions of
the intestine and liver have been damaged, allergens and many materials with
specific biological effects can enter the tissues. The polysaccharide
components of connective tissue constitute a major part of our regulatory
system for maintaining differentiated cell functioning, and absorbed starches
act as “false signals,” with a great capacity for deranging cellular
functioning. Several types of research indicate that carrageenan changes
cellular function in complex ways, imitating changes seen in cancer, for
example. R.J.V. Pulvertaft found "a close similarity between Burkitt cells and
human lymphocytes stimulated by bean extract." He concluded that "…the
possibility of a relation between Burkitt's lymphoma and a diet of beans
should not be neglected," though he emphasized that other factors must be
considered, since most people who eat beans don't develop the disease. The
intestinal parasites which are common in tropical Africa can cause
inflammation of the bowel, leading to the absorption of large amounts of
antigens. Since the bowel becomes inflamed in influenze, it is reasonable to
think that some of the symptoms of "the flu" are produced by absorbed bowel
toxins. The variations in the post-influenza syndromes are very likely
influenced by the nature of the bacteria or foods which are present,
chronically or at the time of an uncompensated stress or inflammatory disease.
K.M. Stevens has argued that while rheumatic fever and glomerulonephritis are
caused by the antigens of streptococci, systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE) is
probably caused by the antigens of gram-positive lactobacilli found in the
normal flora. Migraine, SLE, chronic fatigue syndrome, thyroid problems, and
some kinds of porphyria seem to be more common in women of re-productive age,
and are often exacerbated by premenstrual hormone changes. According to
Stevens, "SLE is almost entirely a disease of women of child-bearing age. One
possibility for this selection could be that women during this period harbour
a peculiar flora. This is indeed the case; large numbers of gram-positive
lactobacilli are present in the vagina only during the thirty-odd years when
regular menstrual activity is present." In 1974, I noticed that I consistently
got a migraine headache after drinking a lactobacillus milk product, and
stopped using (and recommending) yogurt and other lactobacillus foods, though
I suspected it was the lactic acid which caused the immediate symptoms. Lactic
acid is a metabolic burden, especially when combined with an estrogen excess,
but Stevens' main point, about the significance of our immunological response
to systemic bacterial antigens, deserves more attention. On a typical diet,
tissues progressively accumulate linoleic acid, and this alters the structure
of mitochondrial cardiolipin, which governs the response of the mitochondrial
enzymes to the thyroid hormone. This process is especially evident in the
female liver. In the “autoimmune” diseases, such as lupus, there are typically
antibodies to cardiolipin, as if the body were trying to reject its own
tissues, which have been altered by the storage of linoleic acid. The altered
mitochondrial function, which is involved in so many symptoms, can become part
of a vicious circle, with endotoxin and estrogen having central roles, once
the stage has been set by the combination of diet, stress, and toxins. A few
months ago I had a questionnaire circulated in a “fibromyositis” discussion
group on the internet, and the consistency of responses was interesting. The
questions were: 1) Have you noticed that any of your symptoms are worse
premenstrually? 2) Have you noticed that any symptom is less severe
premenstrually? 3) Do any symptoms seem to be worse periodically, but without
being associated with the premenstrual time? 4) Did your symptoms appear after
use of oral contraceptives or IUD? Except for one woman who was taking oral
contraceptives at the time she became sick, and kept taking them, and who
didn’t notice any cycle, all of the answers to the first three questions (15
of the 16 who responded) were identical: 1) yes, 2) no, 3) no. The
premenstrual estrogen-dominance usually leads progressively to higher
prolactin and lower thyroid function. Estrogen is closely associated with
endotoxinemia, and with histamine and nitric oxide formation, and with the
whole range of inflammatory and “autoimmune” diseases. Anything that irritates
the bowel, leading to increased endotoxin absorption, contributes to the same
cluster of metabolic consequences. I have previously discussed the use of
antibiotics (and/or carrot fiber and/or charcoal) to relieve the premenstrual
syndrome, and have mentioned the study in which the lifespan was extended by
occasionally adding charcoal to the diet. A few years ago, I heard about a
Mexican farmer who collected his neighbors' runt pigs, and got them to grow
normally by adding charcoal to their diet. This probably achieves the same
thing as adding antibiotics to their food, which is practiced by pig farmers
in the US to promote growth and efficient use of food. Charcoal, besides
binding and removing toxins, is also a powerful catalyst for the oxidative
destruction of many toxic chemicals. In a sense, it anticipates the action of
the protective enzymes of the intestinal wall and the liver. Some women with
premenstrual fatigue have found that the “premenstrual” phase tends to get
longer and longer, until they have chronic fatigue. I found that to be one of
the easiest "PMS" problems to correct. When people are older, and have been
sick longer, the fatigue problem is likely to involve more systems of the
body. The larger the quantity of "toxic fat" stored in the body, the more
careful the person must be about increasing metabolic and physical activity.
Using more vitamin E, short-chain saturated fats, and other anti-lipid-
peroxidation agents is important. The inflammatory diseases that develop after
prolonged stress are sometimes hard to correct. But avoiding exposure to the
major toxic allergens--such as carrageenan--is an essential consideration,
just as important as correcting the thyroid function and avoiding the
antithyroid substances. Low cholesterol is very commonly involved in the
diseases of stress, and--like inadequate dietary protein--will make the system
less responsive to supplementary thryoid hormone. The proliferative aspects of
the inflammatory diseases represent, I think, a primitive form of
regeneration. Arthritis, atherosclerosis, various granulomatous processes,
breast diseases, liver adenomas, etc., provide an opportunity for
investigating the various systems and substances that guide cell proliferation
toward reconstruction, rather than obstructive and deformative, degenerative,
processes. Degenerative diseases probably all contain clues for understanding
regeneration, as I have suggested in relation to Alzheimer’s disease and
inflammation. I will be talking about these in other newsletters, but the
first step will always be to minimize exposure to the disruptive substances.
REFERENCES Pathol Biol (Paris) 1979 Dec;27(10):615-626 [Biological and
pharmacological effects of carrageenan].[Article in French] Roch-Arveiller M,
Giroud JP “Carrageenan is sulfated polysaccharide which has been extensively
used as emulsifier and thickening agent in the food industry, for its ability
to induce acute inflammation in pharmacology and for its selectively toxic
effect for macrophages in immunology. Carrageenan is a complex substance which
displays various biological properties. The authors have shown the extent of
these actions and reviewed the latest investigations on this subject.”
Kirchheiner B J Allergy Clin Immunol 1995 May;95(5 Pt 1):933-936 Anaphylaxis
to carrageenan: a pseudo-latex allergy. Tarlo SM, Dolovich J, Listgarten C
“Anaphylactic reactions during a barium enema have been attributed to allergy
to latex on the barium enema device. The observation of anaphylaxis during
barium enema without latex exposure or latex allergy led to the performance of
an allergy skin test to the barium enema solution.” “Individual components of
the barium enema solution were obtained for double-blind skin testing. A RAST
to identify specific IgE antibodies to the skin test active agent was
established.” “Carrageenan, a component of the barium enema solution, produced
positive reactions to allergy skin test and RAST. Gastrointestinal symptoms
for which the patient was being investigated by the barium enema subsequently
disappeared with a diet free of carrageenan. CONCLUSIONS: Carrageenan is a
previously unreported cause of anaphylaxis during barium enema. It is an
allergen widely distributed in common foods and potentially could account for
some symptoms related to milk products or baby formula.” Cancer Detect Prev
1981;4(1-4):129-134 Harmful effects of carrageenan fed to animals. Watt J,
Marcus R “An increased number of reports have appeared in the literature
describing the harmful effects of degraded and undegraded carrageenan supplied
to several animal species in their diet or drinking fluid. The harmful effects
include foetal toxicity, teratogenicity, birth defects, pulmonary lesions,
hepatomegaly, prolonged storage in Kupffer cells, ulcerative disease of the
large bowel with hyperplastic, metaplastic, and polypoidal mucosal changes,
enhancement of neoplasia by carcinogens, and, more ominously, colorectal
carcinoma. Degraded carrageenan as a drug or food additive has been restricted
in the United States by the FDA, but undegraded carrageenan is still widely
used throughout the world as a food additive. Its harmful effects in animals
are almost certainly associated with its degradation during passage through
the gastrointestinal tract. There is a need for extreme caution in the use of
carrageenan or carrageenan-like products as food additives in our diet, and
particularly in slimming recipes.” Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand [A] 1980
May;88(3):135-141 Stereomicroscopic and histologic changes in the colon of
guinea pigs fed degraded carrageenan. Olsen PS, Poulsen SS “A colitis-like
state induced in Guinea Pigs fed degraded carrageenan orally. By means of a
combined semimacroscopic and histologic technique the course of the disease
was followed during 28 days. The changes were primarily seen and became most
prominent in the caecum. The first lesions were observed following 24 hours of
treatment as small rounded foci initially with degenerative changes and
inflammation in the surface epithelium, later forming superficial focal
ulcerations. Ulcerative changes gradually progressed during the experiment,
forming linear and later large, geographical ulcerations. Topographically the
ulcerative process was strongly related to the larger submucosal vessels.
Nonulcerated parts of the mucosa were not changed until following 7-14 days of
treatment. The mucosa became bulging, granulated and finally villus-like.
Accumulation of macrophages was found under the surface epithelium after 7-17
days. Possible pathogenetic mechanisms are discussed, especially the
development of the early lesions and the significance of the macrophages.
Cancer Res 1997 Jul 15;57(14):2823-2826 Filament disassembly and loss of
mammary myoepithelial cells after exposure to lambda-carrageenan. Tobacman JK
“Carrageenans are naturally occurring sulfated polysaccharides, widely used in
commercial food preparation to improve the texture of processed foods. Because
of their ubiquity in the diet and their observed preneoplastic effects in
intestinal cells, their impact on human mammary myoepithelial cells in tissue
culture was studied. At concentrations as low as 0.00014%, lambda-carrageenan
was associated with disassembly of filaments with reduced immunostaining for
vimentin, alpha-smooth muscle-specific actin, and gelsolin; increased staining
for cytokeratin 14; and cell death. The absence of mammary myoepithelial cells
is associated with invasive mammary malignancy; hence, the destruction of
these cells in tissue culture by a low concentration of a widely used food
additive suggests a dietary mechanism for mammary carcinogenesis not
considered previously.” Agents Actions 1981 May;11(3):265-273 Carrageenan: a
review of its effects on the immune system. Thomson AW, Fowler EF
“Carrageenans (kappa, lambda and iota) are sulphated polysaccharides isolated
from marine algae that can markedly suppress immune responses both in vivo and
in vitro. Impairment of complement activity and humoral responses to
T-dependent antigens, depression of cell-mediated immunity, prolongation of
graft survival and potentiation of tumour growth by carrageenans have been
reported. The mechanism responsible for carrageenan-induced immune suppression
is believed to be its selective cytopathic effect on macrophages. This
property of carrageenan has led to its adoption as a tool for analysing the
role of these cells in the induction and expression of immune reactivity.
Systemic administration of carrageenan may, however, induce disseminated
intravascular coagulation and inflict damage on both the liver and kidney.
This is an important consideration in the interpretation of the effects of
carrageenan in vivo and precludes its use as a clinical immune suppressant.”
Biomedicine 1978 May;28(3):148-152 Carrageenan and the immune response.
Thomson AW “Since the biological effects of carrageenan were reviewed in 1972
by Di Rosa it has become clear from a large number of reports that this algal
polysaccharide markedly influences immune responses. Profound suppression of
immunity evidenced by impaired antibody production, graft rejection, delayed
hypersensitivity and anti-tumour immunity, has been observed in carrageenan-
treated animals and the immunodepressive ability of carrageenan confirmed by
in vitro studies. Efforts at analysis of carrageenan-induced immune
suppression have focussed on the selective cy-totoxic effect of this agent
onmononuclear phagocytes. Faith in the ability of carrageenan to eliminate
those cells has led to its use in examination of the role played by
mononuclear phagocytes in various aspects of immune reactivity. This review
documents and discusses the effects of carrageenan on immune responses and
assesses the value of carrageenan as a useful tool in both current and future
work aimed at broadening our knowledge of mechanisms underlying immune
reactions.” Teratology 1981 Apr;23(2):273-278 Teratogenic effect of lambda-
carrageenan on the chick embryo. Monis B, Rovasio RA “Carrageenans are widely
used as food additives. Thus, it seemed of interest to test their possible
teratogenic action. For this purpose, 530 chick eggs were injected in the yolk
sac with 0.1 ml of a solution of 0.1% lambda-carrageenan in 0.9% sodium
chloride. As controls, 286 eggs were injected with 0.1 ml of 9.0% sodium
chloride. In addition, 284 eggs received no treatment. After incubation for 48
--50 hours at 39 degrees C, embryos were fixed, cleared, and observed with a
stereoscopic microscope. The frequency of abnormal embryos in the group
receiving lambda-carrageenan was higher than in the controls (p less than
0.04). Partial duplication of the body, abnormal flexures of the trunk,
anencephaly, a severely malformed brain, thickening of the neural tube wall,
an irregular neural tube lumen with segmentary occlusion and a reduction in
crown-rump length and number of somites were distinctly seen in thelambda-
carrageenan-injected group. Moreover, the average number of anomalies per
embryo in the lambda-carrageenan-injected group was nearly twice that in the
controls. Present data indicate that lambda-carrageenan has teratogenic
effects on early stages of the development of the chick embryo.” Food Addit
Contam 1989 Oct;6(4):425-436 Intestinal uptake and immunological effects of
carrageenan--current concepts. Nicklin S, Miller K “Carrageenans are a group
of high molecular weight sulphated polygalactans which find extensive use
inthe food industry as thickening, gelling and protein-suspending agents.
Although there is no evidence to suggest that the persorption of small amounts
of carrageenans across the intestinal barrier poses an acute toxic hazard,
they are known to be biologically active in a number of physiological systems
and extended oral administration in laboratory animals has been shown to
modify both in vivo and in vitro immune competence. Whereas this effect could
be attributed to carrageenan having a selective toxic effect on antigen-
processing macrophages, additional studies suggest that macrophages can also
influence immune responses by the timed release of immunoregulatory mediators.
Evidence in support of this comes from in vitro studies which demonstrate that
carrageenan-treated macrophages can, depending on conditions and time of
administration, release either stimulatory or inhibitory factors. The former
is known to be the immunostimulatory agent interleukin 1 (IL-1). The
inhibitory factor, which is produced at an early stage following exposure to
non-toxic doses of carrageenans, has yet to be formally identified but it is
believed to be a prostaglandin because of its specific mode of action and
short biological half-life. At present it is impossible to relate these
studies to the human situation. Although it is established that carrageenans
can cross the intestinal barrier of experimental animals, there is no evidence
to suggest that the limited uptake that may occur in man in any way interferes
with normal immune competence. Nevertheless, increased exposure may occur in
the neonate during weaning, and adults and children following allergic
reactions and episodes of gastrointestinal disease. Further studies under such
conditions now seem warranted in order to elucidate the possible immunological
consequences which may be associated with enhanced uptake of carrageenans in
vulnerable groups.” Health Rep 1990;2(4):343-359 “Crohn's disease and
ulcerative colitis: morbidity and mortality,” Rod Riley. “This study analyzes
hospital discharges and deaths from 1971 to 1986 for patients with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which includes Crohn's disease and
ulcerative colitis. The data are based on hospital morbidity and mortality
statistics provided to Statistics Canada by the provinces. For Crohn's
disease, age-standardized rates per 100,000 population for hospital discharges
increased by 148% for males and by 192% for females over the study period. In
1986, the rate for females was 48% higher than the rate for males. For both
males and females, age-specific discharge rates were highest in the 20-24 age
group. For ulcerative colitis, male age-standardized discharge rates decreased
by 17% from 1971 to 1977, and then increased by 41% from 1977 to 1986. For
females, the rates decreased by 18% from 1971 to 1976, then remained fairly
stable from 1976 to 1986. Male and female discharge rates were similar over
the study period. For females, rates were highest in the 20-34 age groups; for
males, they were highest in the 65 and older age groups. In 1971, rates for
both types of IBD were almost the same, but by the end of the study period the
rate per 100,000 population for Crohn's disease was 34 for females and 23 for
males, while for ulcerative colitis the rates were 13 for females and 14 for
males. During the 16-year study period, cause of death data showed 556 deaths
directly attributed to Crohn's disease and 761 deaths at-tributed to
ulcerative colitis. The under 45 age group accounted for 25% of deaths due to
Crohn's disease and for 17% of deaths due to ulcerative colitis. The time
trends for IBD hospital discharge rates in Canada closely parallel the
findings of hospital discharge rates in the United States and England-Wales. A
comparison with epidemiological population surveys strongly suggests that
increased discharge rates are due mostly to increases in incidence and
prevalence of IBD in the general population.” Q J Med 1992 Feb;82(298):125-138
Epidemiology of Crohn's disease in Indian migrants and the indigenous
population in Leicestershire. Jayanthi V, Probert CS, Pinder D, Wicks AC,
Mayberry JF “A retrospective, epidemi-ological community study of Crohn's
disease was performed in Leicestershire from 1972 to 1989. The county
population of 930,000 includes 93,000 South Asians. Potential cases were
identified from hospital departments of pathology, endoscopy and medical
records, in addition to general practitioners. There were 582 cases in
Europeans and 28 in South Asians. The incidence of Crohn's disease in
Europeans and South Asians has increased, particularly in Muslims. The
standardized incidence in South Asians during the 1980s was 2.4/10(5)/year in
Hindus, 3.4/10(5)/year in Sikhs and 5.4/10(5)/year in Muslims. The
standardized incidence in Europeans has risen significantly to 4.7/10(5)/year
from 3.4/10(5)/year in the 1970s (chi 2 = 8.1, p less than 0.005). In
Leicester this increase can be accounted for entirely by new cases of colonic
disease. All ethnic groups had a similar disease distribution. Small bowel
disease was inversely associated with age, whilst colonic disease increased
with age. However, the difference in age-specific incidence of Crohn's disease
for different age bands at various sites was not significant. Overall, Hindus
have a much lower incidence of Crohn's disease than Europeans.”
Gastroenterology 1991 Feb;100(2):350-358 The epidemiology of inflammatory
bowel disease: a large, population-based study in Sweden. Ekbom A, Helmick C,
Zack M, Adami HO “Previous population-based incidence studies of inflammatory
bowel disease are limited by small numbers, short duration, or inadequate
case-finding. To address these problems, we identified all persons with
confirmed ulcerative colitis (n = 2509) or Crohn's disease (n = 1469) in the
Uppsala Health Care Region from 1965 to 1983. Age-specific incidence rates by
sex were slightly greater for males with ulcerative colitis and females with
Crohn's disease. Incidence rates for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease
were higher in urban than rural areas. The annual incidence rate of ulcerative
colitis increased from less than 7 per 100,000 to more than 12 per 100,000
during the study period, while the rate for Crohn's disease remained between 5
and 7 per 100,000. The increase in the incidence of ulcerative colitis was the
result of a marked increase in the number of patients with ulcerative
proctitis. Analyses by 5-year birth cohorts suggest that those born from 1945
through 1954 were at higher risk for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease,
and that this effect was accounted for by those born in the first half of the
year. The seasonality in the cohort effect, combined with the urban
preponderance of disease, suggests that environmental causes may be involved
in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.” Gut 1988 Mar;29(3):346-351,
Cardiff Crohn's disease jubilee: the incidence over 50 years. Rose JD, Roberts
GM, Williams G, Mayberry JF, Rhodes J “The incidence of Crohn's disease in
Cardiff between 1931 and 1985 has been examined using hospital diagnostic
indices supplemented in recent years by records from clinicians, and the
departments of pathology and radiology. Four hundred and seven new patients
were confirmed after all notes had been reviewed. There has been a large
increase from 0.18 cases/10(5) of the population per year in the 1930s to
current values of 8.3/10(5)/year. The incidence continues to rise and shows an
increasing proportion of patients with colorectal disease. Peak age specific
incidences occur in the third and eighth decades of life.” Am J Hematol 1992
Mar;39(3):176-182 Polysaccharide encapsulated bacterial infection in sickle
cell anemia: a thirty year epidemiologic experience. Wong WY, Powars DR, Chan
L, Hiti A, Johnson C, Overturf G “Annual age-specific incidence rates of
Streptococcus pneumoniae or Haemophilus influenzae bacterial septicemia in
sickle cell anemia (SS) were determined for the years of 1957 through 1989.
Forty-nine patients had 64 episodes of septicemia among a population of 786 SS
patients observed for 8,138 person-years. Peak frequency of infection occurred
between 1968-1971 and 1975-1981 with a conspicuous absence of episodes in
1972, 1973, 1982-1984, and 1986-1987, thus demonstrating cycles of high and
low attack rates. The annual age-specific incidence rate of septicemia varied
from 64.5 (1965) to 421.1 (1980) per 1,000 person-years for those under 2
years of age and never exceeded 10.2 per 1,000 in those over 4 years of age.
Following the introduction of pneumococcal polyvalent vaccine in 1978,
incidence of infection decreased in SS children greater than 2 years of age.
No modification of the risk of infection was observed in immunized children
less than 2 years of age. During these three decades, there has been a ten-
fold increase in the number of SS adults over 20 years of age. The relative
risk of chronic sickle complications comparing the survivors of septicemia to
the non-infected patients was: subsequent death 1.76, retinopathy 4.06,
avascular necrosis 1.95, symptomatic cholelithiasis 1.33, stroke 1.30, and
priapism 1.26. These data suggest that prognosis for lifetime severe SS is
initially manifested as an increased risk of septicemia during childhood.”
Gastroenterol Clin Biol 1986 Jun;10(6-7):468-474 [Trends of mortality from
cirrhosis in France between 1925 and 1982 Coppere H, Audigier JC “In 1982,
13,866 deaths secondary to cirrhosis were reported. Between 1925 and 1982, the
number of deaths increased by 163 p. 100. This overall change was observed
gradually: profound drop in the cirrhosis mortality rate during the Second
World War, increase between 1945 and 1967, stabilization between 1967 and 1975
and more pronounced decline from then on. Cirrhosis mortality rate per 100,000
increased from 9.17 to 28.21 (+208 p. 100) in males and from 3.63 to 10.38
(+186 p. 100) in females from 1945 to 1982. The increase was approximately the
same whatever the age. A cohort effect was observed in both sexes. There were
two successive waves of increased mortality separated by an interval of non
augmentation for the cohorts born between 1906 and 1915 and between 1931 and
1940. Since 1967, mortality due to cirrhosis has stopped increasing in both
sexes. These changes may be related to decreasing alcohol consumption in
France, certainly one of the major objectives in present day health programs.
Abrupt reduction of alcohol consumption should be followed by a dramatic fall
in the number of deaths from cirrhosis. Progressive decline of consumption is
possibly associated with a decrease in the incidence of the disease. In 2,000,
the rate for cirrhosis mortality is expected to be the same as that observed
in the middle of the 20th century.” Cancer Res 1987 Sep 15;47(18):4967-4972
Changing incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in Japan. Okuda K, Fujimoto I,
Hanai A, Urano Y “A trend in the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
in Japan was studied from the data of the Osaka Cancer Registry (population,
8,512,351 in 1981) for the period of 1963-1983, the Vital Statistics of Japan,
Ministry of Health and Welfare, and the Japan Autopsy Registry which contained
594,132 individually filed cases in the 26-year period from 1958 to 1983. Both
cancer registry data and autopsy records showed a more than 2-fold increase in
HCC incidence, particularly in the last 10 years or so, among males and a less
pronounced increase in females. The same trend was borne out by the cancer
registries of Nagasaki City and Miyagi Prefecture and the Vital Statistics.
When studied with the autopsy data, it was found that the numbers of autopsies
for cirrhosis without HCC and autopsies for HCC (with and without cirrhosis)
were about the same in 1958-1961 and that currently (1980-1983) the latter is
about 2 times the former. As one of the possible causes of increase in HCC
incidence other than prolonged survival of patients with cirrhosis, chronic
non-A, non-B hepatitis is discussed. “ Hepatogastroenterology 1997
Sep;44(17):1401-1403 Hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatic cirrhosis in Mexico:
a 25 year necroscopy review. Cortes-Espinosa T, Mondragon-Sanchez R, Hurtado-
Andrade H, Sanchez-Cisneros R “BACKGROUND/AIMS: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
is a common form of cancer which is found throughout the world. In recent
years, the rates of HCC seem to have increased in European and North American
countries.” “RESULTS: Of 12556 autopsies studied, 73 cases of histologically
proven HCC were reported, representing a total necropsy carcinoma incidence of
0.59%. Fifty-five cases were associated with cirrhosis (0.43%), and 18 were
not (0.14%). HCC was two times more common in males (67%) than in females
(33%), with a ratio of 2:1. During this period, the necropsy incidence of HCC
rose steadily to twice its original level (1965-69 incidence 0.35%; 1985-89
incidence 0.69%). The necropsy incidence of cirrhosis was 4% (329 males, 185
females). The overall TC/T index was 75% (87% for males and 50% for females).
The overall TC/C index was 10.7% (13% for males and 6.4% for females).
CONCLUSIONS: There was a two-fold increase in the incidence of HCC in the
Mexican population studied over a 25-year period. HCC was associated with
cirrhosis in the majority of cases. HCC was two times more common in males
than in females in patients with cirrhosis; in patients without cirrhosis, the
ratio was 1:1. The incidence of cirrhosis was 4%, which remained unchanged
with the passage of time.” Hepatogastroenterology 1984 Oct;31(5):215-217
Hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis: a review of their relative incidence
in a 25-year period in the Florence area. Bartoloni St Omer F, Giannini A,
Napoli P “An eight-fold increase in the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma
in the Florence area was detected in a 25-year retrospective review of adult
autopsy records in the Institute of Pathology of the University of Florence.
During the same period, the incidence of cirrhosis did not show a parallel
increase. The relationship between hepatocellular carcinoma, cirrhosis and HB
virus is briefly discussed in the light of these findings.” J Clin Pathol 1978
Feb;31(2):108-110 Hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatic cirrhosis in the west
of Scotland: a 25-year necropsy review. Burnett RA, Patrick RS, Spilg WG,
Buchanan WM, Macsween RN “A two-fold increase in the incidence of
hepatocellular carcinoma in the west of Scotland is reported on the basis of a
25-year retrospective necropsy review (313 cases). This increase is not
accompanied by a corresponding increase in the incidence of hepatic cirrhosis.
The relationship between hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatic cirrhosis is
discussed in the light of these findings.” J Hyg Epidemiol Microbiol Immunol
1990;34(4):343-348 “Increasing trend of hyperbilirubinemia incidence in the
blood donors population,” Pintera J. Hepatogastroenterology 1984
Oct;31(5):211-214 Primary hepatic cancer and liver cirrhosis. Autopsy study
covering fifty years. Bethke BA, Schubert GE “Autopsy reports from 1931 to
1980 were used to study the incidence of liver cirrhosis (LC) and the
association between LC and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in our area
(Wuppertal, Germany). An increase in LC and in LC with HCC has occurred since
World War II, with HCC being most frequently associated with postnecrotic
cirrhosis. The prevalence of HCC in men with LC was highest (13.5%) in
1966-1970, whereas the prevalence of HCC with LC in women rose abruptly to a
peak (11.8%) during the last 5 years of the study. Possible etiological
factors for the association between LC and HCC are discussed.” Riv Eur Sci Med
Farmacol 1990 Jun;12(3):165-168 [Oral contraceptive and hepatic
effects].[Article in Italian] Tarantino G, Morelli L, Califano C “The general
use of synthetic estrogens like DC pointed out that near many skilled
collateral effects, some others that are showing with a decrease of bile
excretion (cholestasis), reversible with their administration interruption;
with hepatic cells adenoma that are potentially premalignant and can transform
into hepatocellular carcinoma; with vascular complications such as (most
frequently in carcinomatousis) "hepatic peliosis" and "thrombosis" of
suprahepatic veins (Budd-Chiari's syndrome). There is no overall increase in
the incidence of gallbladder disease (cholelithiasis and cholecystitis).”
Hepatology 1990 Nov;12(5):1106-1110 Fatty liver hepatitis (steatohepatitis)
and obesity: an autopsy study with analysis of risk factors. Wanless IR, Lentz
JS “Steatohepatitis (fatty liver hepatitis), histologically identical to
alcoholic disease, occurs in some obese patients after jejunoileal bypass. A
similar lesion occurs rarely in obese patients without bypass surgery, but the
risk factors are poorly understood. Hepatic steatosis, steatohepatitis and
fibrosis were sought in 351 apparently nonalcoholic patients at autopsy and
various risk factors were evaluated.” “Thus this study supports the hypothesis
that fatty acids have a role in the hepatocellular necrosis found in some
obese individuals.” Prostaglandins 1977 Aug;14(2):295-307 Reduced exudation
and increased tissue proliferation during chronic inflammation in rats
deprived of endogenous prostaglandin precursors. Bonta IL, Parnham MJ, Adolfs
MJ “Two models of chronic inflammation were studied in rats deprived of
endogenous precursors of prostaglandins by feeding the animals on essential
fatty acid deficient (EFAD) food. During kaolin-induced pouch-granuloma,
exudate production was markedly reduced in EFAD rats, when compared with
normal animals. The exudates from normal rats contained large amounts of PGE,
but in the exudates from EFAD rats the amount of PGE was very markedly
reduced. Similarly, with carrageenan-impregnated polyether sponges, the
exudative component of inflammation was reduced in EFAD rats. However, the
proliferative component was significantly increased, particularly in relation
to the stunted growth of EFAD rats. Sponge exudates from EFAD rats contained
fewer leucocytes than those from normal animals but the fall in leucocyte
count was much smaller than the very marked reduction in PGE activity. EFAD
rats also exhibited a significant increase in adrenal weights. The results are
discussed in the light of the ambivalent (pro- or anti-inflammatory) role of
endogenous PGS. It appears that, in the proliferative phase of inflammation,
the anti-inflammatory role of PGs is more dominant.” J Hepatol 1997
Sep;27(3):578-582 Subfulminant hepatic failure in autoimmune hepatitis type 1:
an unusual form of presentation. Herzog D, Rasquin-Weber AM, Debray D, Alvarez
F “Autoimmune hepatitis type 1 is known to progress insidiously and in many
cases cirrhosis is already established at the first presentation of symptoms.
It affects mostly females, with peaks of incidence around 10 and 50 years of
age. Subfulminant hepatic failure is an unusual initial form of presentation
of AIH type 1 and it was observed in three post-pubertal female patients.
Rapid disease evolution or no response to immunosuppressive therapy led to
liver transplantation in all patients. Two did not have cirrhosis, and the
third had focal cirrhosis. The occurrence of the unusual subfulminant form of
autoimmune hepatitis in three latepubertal girls (Tanner V) suggests that
estrogen may play a role in the severity of the disease.” Acta
Hepatogastroenterol (Stuttg) 1977 Apr;24(2):97-101 Plasma prolactin and
prolactin release in liver cirrhosis. Wernze H, Schmitz E “A significant
increase of basal plasma prolactin levels (radioimmunoassayed) in 75 patients
with liver cirrhosis was found in comparison to 50 male controls (8.5+/-4.5
(SD) vs. 5.5+/-1.7 ng/ml p less than 0.001). The extent and incidence of
hyperprolactinaemia in 48 patients with alcoholic cirrhosis was more
pronounced than in 27 cases of cirrhosis of non-alcoholic aetiologies (mean
9.7+/-4.8 vs. 5.7+/-2.1 ng/ml). No relation to ascites formation as well as to
the development of gynaecomastia was apparent. Prolactin release following
thyrotropin-releasing hormone was markedly enhanced in alcoholic as compared
to non-alcoholic cirrhosis. Possibly hyperprolactinaemia and increased
pituitary hormone reserve reflects hyperoestrogenism but changes of the
hypothalamic regulation cannot be excluded as yet.” Jpn J Pharmacol 1991
Apr;55(4):551-554 Endotoxin- and inflammation-induced depression of the
hepatic drug metabolism in rats. Ishikawa M, Sasaki K, Nishimura K, Takayanagi
Y, Sasaki K “Carrageenan-induced inflammation and exposure to endotoxin
considerably decreased the content of cytochrome P-450 and activities of
ethylmorphine N-demethylase and meperidine N-demethylase, but did not decrease
the activities of aniline hydroxylase or NADPH-cytochrome c reductase,
compared with the respective activities in rats treated with carrageenan
alone. These results suggest that under these experimental conditions, the two
host-related environmental factors interact and enhance a decrease in rat
hepatic microsomal drug metabolizing enzymes depending on the substrate used.”
Infect Immun 1991 Feb;59(2):679-683 Enhancement of lipopolysaccharide-induced
tumor necrosis factor production in mice by carrageenan pretreatment. Ogata M,
Yoshida S, Kamochi M, Shigematsu A, Mizuguchi Y “Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
is a cytokine which mediates endotoxin shock and causes multiple organ damage.
It is thought that macrophage (MP) activation is necessary to increase
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced TNF production and lethality. Carrageenan
(CAR) is sulfated polygalactose which destroys MP; it is used as a MP blocker.
We found that CAR pretreatment can increase both endotoxin-induced TNF
production and the mortality rate in mice. The ddY mice (7 to 8 weeks old)
were injected intraperitoneally with CAR (5-mg dose) and challenged
intravenously with LPS 24 h later. Without CAR pretreatment, LPS doses of less
than 10 micrograms did not induce TNF in sera. After pretreatment, however,
about 3 x 10(3) to 4 x 10(4) U of TNF per ml was produced after LPS injection
at doses of 0.1 to 10 micrograms, respectively. TNF production was
significantly increased by CAR pretreatment at LPS doses of more than 10
micrograms. CAR pretreatment rendered the mice more sensitive to the lethal
effect of LPS; 50% lethal doses of LPS in CAR-pretreated mice and
nonpretreated mice were 26.9 and 227 micrograms, respectively. The mortality
of the two groups was significantly different at doses of 50, 100, and 200 mi-
crograms of LPS. CAR increased LPS-induced TNF production and mortality within
2 h, much earlier than MP activators, which needed at least 4 days. Our
results made clear that TNF production is enhanced not only by a MP activator
but also by a MP blocker.” Prog Clin Biol Res 1989;286:237-242 Effect of
macrophage inhibition in carrageenan- and D-galactosamine-induced sensitivity
to low-dose endotoxin. Kujawa KI, Berning A, Odeyale C, Yaffe LJ. J Surg Res
1984 Jul;37(1):63-68 Evidence for aerobic glycolysis in lambda-carrageenan-
wounded skeletal muscle. Caldwell MD, Shearer J, Morris A, Mastrofrancesco B,
Henry W, Albina JE “Classically, increased lactate production in wounded
tissue is ascribed to anaerobic glycolysis although its oxygen consumption has
been found to be similar to normal tissue. This apparent inconsistency was
studied in a standardized isolated perfused wound model. Male Sprague-Dawley
rats were wounded (group W) with intramuscular injections of lambda-
carrageenan and fed ad lib.; not wounded and pair fed to the decreased food
intake of the wounded animals (group PFC); or not wounded and fed ad lib.
(group ALC). After 5 days, the hindlimbs of animals from each group were
either perfused using a standard perfusate with added [U-14C]glucose or
[1-14C]pyruvate or assayed for the tissue content of lactate and pyruvate. In
addition, the effect of a 30% hemorrhage on the tissue lactate and pyruvate
concentration was examined. Wounding increased glucose uptake and lactate
production by 100 and 96%, respectively, above that seen in ALC animals.
Oxygen consumption was unchanged by wounding (5.74, 5.14, and 5.83
mumole/min/100 g in W, PFC, and ALC, respectively). Glucose and pyruvate
oxidation were also unaltered among the groups. Hemorrhage resulted in a
comparable increase in lactate and pyruvate in tissue from wounded and pair-
fed control animals (above those concentrations found in tissue harvested
without preexisting hemorrhage). As a consequence, the same relationship in
L/P ratio was maintained after hemorrhage. Taken together, these results
confirm the presence of aerobic glycolysis in wounded tissue (unchanged oxygen
consumption, glucose, and pyruvate oxidation). In addition, pyruvate
dehydrogenase activity in the wound was apparently the same as that found in
muscle from pair-fed control animals.” Food Chem Toxicol 1984
Aug;22(8):615-621 Effect of orally administered food-grade carrageenans on
antibody-mediated and cell-mediated immunity in the inbred rat. Nicklin S,
Miller K “Experiments were performed to investigate the immunological
consequences associated with the persorption of poorly degradable carregeenans
from the diet. Using an inbred strain of rat it was demonstrated
histochemically, by the carrageenan-specific Alcian blue staining technique,
that small quantities of food-grade carrageenans given at 0.5% in drinking-
water for 90 days could penetrate the intestinal barrier of adult animals.
This apparently occurred via an intact mucosa in the absence of inflammatory
or pathological lesions. The carrageenan was demonstrated in macrophage-like
cells present within the villi and lamina propria of the small intestine. The
oral administration of kappa, lambda or iota food-grade carrageenans did not
affect local (biliary) or systemic antibody responses to gut commensal
microorganisms, or to orally-administered sheep erythrocytes. However, when
sheep red blood cells were administered parenterally the ensuing anti-sheep
red blood cell haemagglutinating antibody response was temporarily suppressed
in carrageenan-fed rats. lambda-Carrageenan and iota-carrageenan both
significantly (P less than or equal to 0.01 and P less than or equal to 0.05,
respectively) reduced the mid-phase (14-28 days) haemagglutinin response;
kappa-carrageenan (L100) was less effective but caused significant depression
at day 21 (P less than or equal to 0.01). Individual responses were, however,
within the control range 35 days after sheep erythrocyte administration, thus
indicating the temporary nature of this effect. Although carrageenan
administration depressed the anti-sheep erythrocyte antibody response, it did
not affect T-cell immune competence as measured by the popliteal lymph node
assay for graft-versus-host reactivity.” J Nutr 1986 Feb;116(2):223-232
Effects of certain dietary fibers on apparent permeability of the rat
intestine. Shiau SY, Chang GW “Apparent intestinal permeability was determined
indirectly by orally administering a poorly absorbed dye, phenol red, to rats
and measuring its recovery in feces and in urine. Increased apparent
permeability was recognized by increased dye recovery in urine and by an
increased ratio of urinary to fecal dye recovery. Guar gum, pectin,
carrageenan type I (80% kappa, 20% lambda), carra-geenan type II (iota) and
cellulose were each fed at levels of 5 and 15% (wt/wt) of the diet for 31 d to
male Fischer 344 rats. The average initial weight of rats was 230 g. Rats fed
15% guar gum gained significantly less weight than most of the other rats (P
less than 0.05). Phenol red recovery was measured at 2 and 4 wk after the
beginning of the experiment. At 2 wk urinary recoveries of phenol red were
high in rats fed fiber-free and carrageenan type II diets, indicating
increased apparent permeability. By 4 wk, adaptation had apparently taken
place.” “These data are consistent with the hypothesis that intestinal
permeability to foreign substances may be altered considerably by diet.”
Pathologe 1993 Sep;14(5):247-252 [Persorption of microparticles].[Article in
German] Volkheimer G “Solid, hard microparticles, such as starch granules,
pollen, cellulose particles, fibres and crystals, whose diameters are well
into the micrometre range, are incorporated regularly and in considerable
numbers from the digestive tract. Motor factors play an important part in the
paracellular penetration of the epithelial cell layer. From the subepithelial
region the microparticles are transported away via lymph and blood vessels.
They can be detected in body fluids using simple methods: only a few minutes
after oral administration they can be found in the peripheral blood-stream. We
observed their passage into urine, bile, cerebrospinal fluid, the alveolar
lumen, the peritoneal cavity, breast milk, and transplacentally into the fetal
blood-stream. Since persorbed microparticles can embolise small vessels, this
touches on microangiological problems, especially in the region of the CNS.
The long-term deposit of embolising microparticles which consist of potential
allergens or contaminants, or which are carriers of contaminants, is of
immunological and environmental-technical importance. Numerous ready-made
foodstuffs contain large quantities of microparticles capable of persorption.”
Eur J Pediatr 1993 Jul;152(7):592-594 Oral cornstarch therapy: is persorption
harmless? Gitzelmann R, Spycher MA ”Sediments prepared from freshly voided
urine of four patients with glycogenosis Ia, or leucine-sensitive
hypoglycaemia, on oral cornstarch therapy contained starch granules, evidence
for persorption i.e. the incorporation of undissolved starch particles. In
these patients, amyluria was more marked than in untreated controls. While
cornstarch therapy is successful and causes few side-effects, the possibility
of late adverse reactions to persorbed starch should not be disregarded.” Med
Hypotheses 1991 Jun;35(2):85-87 “Persorption of raw starch: a cause of senile
dementia? Freedman BJ “Intact starch granules in food can pass through the
intestinal wall and enter the circulation. They remain intact if they have not
been cooked for long enough in the presence of water. Some of these granules
embolise arterioles and capillaries. In most organs the collateral circulation
suffices for continued function.In the brain, however, neurones may be lost.
Over many decades the neuronal loss could be of clinical importance. To test
this hypothesis, there is a need to examine brains for the presence of
embolised starch granules. Examining tissues polariscopically clearly
distinguishes starch granules from other objects of similar appearance.”
Kitasato Arch Exp Med 1990 Apr;63(1):1-6 [The Herbst-Volkheimer effect]”
[Article in German], Prokop, O. “More than 150 years ago the foundations were
laid for the so-called HERBST effect which was subsequently forgotten. In the
sixties the phenomenon was rediscovered by VOLKHEIMER at the Charite Hospital
in Berlin and then reviewed through many experiments and publications. What is
meant by the HERBST effect? If an experimental animal or even human being is
given a larger amount of maize starch or also biscuits or some other products
containing starch, starch bodies can be detected rapidly in venous blood
already after minutes or half an hour later and in the urine after one hour
and later. The term "persorption" has been coined for this interesting
phenomenon. It is indeed surprising that it has met with so little attention.
As a matter of fact, it constitutes the basis for our understanding of peroral
immunization and of allergies. In the same way, feeding of carbon particles
results in their appearance and detection in blood, kidney and urine. The same
result is obtained by the intake of diatoms and what is even more important
with meat fibres. I hope you are aware of the implications. When Professor
NAGAI stayed in Berlin, we tried to receive the phenomenon. Since only a few
cell nuclei are necessary for "genetic fingerprinting" we thought that after
intake of 200 or 400 g of raw meat the type of food eaten could be determined
from the urinary sediment by means of the fingerprint method which would be of
forensic significance. Therefore, we eat meat and raw liver and examined the
urinary sediment.” Z Arztl Fortbild (Jena) 1993 Mar 12;87(3):217-221 [The
phenomenon of persorption--history and facts].[Article in German] Volkheimer
G. J Pediatr 1994 Sep;125(3):392-399 Clinical and molecular epidemiology of
enterococcal bacteremia in a pediatric teaching hospital. Christie C, Hammond
J, Reising S, Evans-Patterson J “An apparent increase in the in-cidence of
enterococcal bacteremias from 7 to 48/1000 bacteremias during 1986 to 1991 (p
< 0.01) prompted this descriptive clinical and molecular epidemiologic study
of 83 episodes occurring in 80 children between 1986 and 1992.” “The increase
in enterococcal bacteremias was not due to a clonal strain dissemination but
to an increase in cases of heterogeneous enterococcal strains. We conclude
that enterococcal septicemia is now an important cause of serious morbidity
and death in critically ill children.” R.F.V. Pulvertaft, PHA in relation to
Burkitt's tumour, Lancet sept 12, pp 552-554, 1964. K.M. Stevens, The
aetiology of SLE, Lancet, Sept. 5, 506-508, 1964. Am J Physiol 1991 May;260(5
Pt 1):C910-C916 “Effect of exogenous and endogenous nitric oxide on
mitochondrial respiration of rat hepatocytes.” Stadler J, Billiar TR, Curran
RD, Stuehr DJ, Ochoa JB, Simmons RL. “Although nitric oxide (.N = O)
biosynthesis is inducible in rat hepatocytes (HC), the physiological
significance of .N = O production by these cells is unknown. Short exposure of
HC to authentic .N = O led to a concentration-dependent inhibition of
mitochondrial aconitase, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, and succinate-
ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complexes I and II of the mitochondrial electron
transport chain). Most susceptible to .N = O inhibition was mitochondrial
aconitase, in which a reduction in enzyme activity to 20.2 +/- 1.6% of control
was observed. In contrast to mitochondrial aconitase, cytosolic aconitase
activity was not inhibited by .N = O. After exposure to a maximal inhibitory
concentration of .N = O, mitochondrial aconitase activity recovered completely
within 6 h. Complex I did not fully recover within this incubation period.
Endogenous .N = O biosynthesis was induced in HC by a specific combination of
cytokines and lipopolysaccharide. After 18 h of incubation with these stimuli,
a significant inhibition of mitochondrial aconitase activity to 70.8 +/- 2.4%
of controls was detected. However, this was due only in part to the action of
.N = O. A non-.N=O-dependent inhibition of mitochondrial function appeared to
be mediated by tumor necrosis factor.” Ray Peat's Newsletter Not for
republication without written permission PO Box 5764, Eugene, OR 97405 Raymond
PeatJuly, 1995 Persorption refers to a process in which relatively large
particles pass through the intact wall of the intestine and enter the blood or
lymphatic vessels. It can be demonstrated easily, but food regulators prefer
to act as though it didn't exist. The doctrine that polymers--gums, starches,
peptides, polyester fat substitutes--and other particulate substances can be
safely added to food because they are "too large to be absorbed" is very
important to the food in-dustry and its shills. When the bowel is inflamed,
toxins are absorbed. The natural bacterial endotoxin produces many of the same
inflammatory effects as the food additive, carrageenan. Like inflammatory
bowel disease, the incidence of liver tumors and cirrhosis has increased
rapidly. Liver damage leads to hormonal imbalance. Carrageenan produces
inflammation and immunodeficiency, synergizing with estrogen, endotoxin and
unsaturated fatty acids. “Volkheimer found that mice fed raw starch aged at an
abnormally fast rate, and when he dissected the starch-fed mice, he found a
multitude of blocked arterioles in every organ, each of which caused the death
of the cells that depended on the blood supplied by that arteriole. It isn’t
hard to see how this would affect the functions of organs such as the brain
and heart, even without considering the immunological and other
implications....” ^^^ Top ^^^

