![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

****Cataracts: water, energy, light, and aging** **  
  
Because of the baby boom population bulge, the market for cataract surgery and
the little plastic intraocular lenses is growing wonderfully. According to the
World Health Organization, there were about 20 million cataract surgeries
performed in 2010, with 32 million expected in 2020. In the US, about 3
million cataract surgeries are performed annually. Revenue from sale of the
intraocular lenses in the US alone was $775,000,000 in 2010, and is expected
to reach $965,000,000 by 2017. In 2010, the Alcon company earned
$1,200,000,000 from one type of intraocular lens. (Market Research.com) To
promote the sale of the "premium'" lenses, which cost thousands of dollars,
patients are told that the more expensive lenses will save them money in the
long run, by making ordinary glasses unnecessary (sometimes).

The lens replacement surgery is now sometimes recommended when a cataract has
caused only a slight decrease in visual acuity, or even a suspected decrease
in acuity. I haven't known anyone who had the surgery who had been informed of
the incidence of complications of the surgery, which result in permanent
blindness for thousands of the patients every year.  
  
Some of the causes of cataracts have been known for many years, but the
knowledge is usually ignored by the medical profession. Medical myths about
the causes of disease support present practices. Myths about the causes of
cancer, heart failure, hypertension, menopause, osteoporosis, sarcopenia,
depression, dementia, and cataracts are designed to reinforce each other,
forming an interlocking system, an ideology of the organism.  
  
The conventional ideology identifies pathological cells and defective proteins
and bad genes as the causes of organ failure and disease, and "aging" is seen
as a dimension in which entropy tends to increase those defects.  
  
This ideology discourages thoughts of "field" effects in which the function of
a molecule, a cell, or an organ affects, and is affected by, things that
aren't in direct contact with it. This is why the removal of a lens is treated
so casually. There is some knowledge about the effects of systemic disease on
the eye, but very little about the effects of particular parts of the eye on
systemic physiology, and relatively few physicians are aware of the effects of
one part of the eye on the other parts of the eye. A few of these
physiological interactions within the eye are very interesting. For example,
injury to the lens powerfully stimulates regeneration of nerves in the retina
(Fischer, et al., 2000). Things which injure the lens enough to cause
cataracts to develop might also be injuring the retina, but the emission of
stimulating substances from the lens must be a compensating influence.  
  
Every normal tissue of the eye is emitting substances that affect other parts
of the eye, and probably other parts of the body. Until the 1970s, the
literature was dominated by the view that the lens was a lifeless material,
like hair and toenails, and even in 2013 there is great reluctance of
researchers to recognize its vital cellular activity.  
  
After an artificial lens has been implanted, there are great changes in the
vitreous humor (which fills the space between the retina and the lens), with a
reversal of the gradient of viscosity, and with changes in many proteins,
including transthyretin, alpha antitrypsin, retinoic acid binding protein,
antioxidant proteins, and the enzymes carbonic anhydrase and triosephosphate
isomererase (Neal, et al., 2005).  
  
I haven't seen any recent studies of the effects of lens removal on the
nervous system, but a 1953 study of 21 patients reported a high percentage of
behavioral disturbances following the surgery: "Following the operation 20
patients showed some alteration in behavior including changes in mood,
psychomotor disturbances, paranoid and somatic delusions, hallucinations,
disorientation and confabulations. In 3 cases the disturbance was
characterized as severe." "It is concluded that disturbed behavior is an
integral part of the reaction of almost all cataract patients because of a
complex interaction of a number of factors" (Linn, et al., 1953).  
  
In animal studies, when the lens capsule is closed after removal of the lens,
within a few weeks a well formed lens has regenerated (Gwon, et al., 1993);
cell division is stimulated in the cells remaining attached to the capsule,
similar to the regeneration of the adrenal cortex after its removal.  
  
Artificial replacement lenses are designed (with an ultrasharp edge) to block
the regenerative migration of cells within the capsule, because the cells can
quickly form a new cataract behind the plastic lens; those cataracts commonly
form in reaction to the lens. The use of arsenic to kill these cells has been
proposed, and probably used (Zhang, et al., 2010).  
  
The easy money in lens surgery has obviously discouraged professional interest
in preventing cataracts, or curing them, or stimulating the regeneration of
new lenses. Research in the prevention of cataracts has encountered serious
barriers to performing the clinical trials that would be necessary for
approval. "â€¦ Clinicians have even developed the opinion that lens and cataract
research is no longer necessary to overcome cataract blindness." (Sasaki, et
al., 2000.) However, it isn't inconceivable that someone could find a way to
make prevention, cure, or regeneration significantly remunerative.  
  
Although the lens has no blood supply, fluid carrying nutrients and oxygen is
constantly flowing through it, providing the cells with glucose, amino acids,
and ATP, that it uses for maintaining its structure. Its proteins are being
renewed continually, broken down and synthesized (Ozaki, et al., 1985). There
is clear evidence that some of the core cells retain a nucleus, and that large
molecules can move between cells (Lieska, et al., 1992; Shestopalov and
Bassnett, 2000; Stewart, 2008; Mathias and Rae, 2004). Despite this evidence,
prominent researchers are still promoting the paradigm of inertness, the lens
as analogous to a toenail. As in other cells, ATP maintains the proper water
content in the cells. Besides providing energy and amino acids, the
circulating fluid carries minerals and many hormones and regulatory
substances.  
  
The absence of a blood supply to the lens has kept people from thinking of its
pathology in terms of the inflammatory processes that are now recognized in
other conditions, for example in dementia, heart disease, and cancer, but the
same basic processes can be seen in the development of cataracts. Improved
knowledge of lens physiology is very likely to lead to major improvements in
therapies for the other conditions. In the lens, the state of water changes
before there is any other evidence that a cataract is developing (Mori, 1993);
detecting similar water changes in other tissues might improve diagnosis and
treatment of other problems. Things that acutely lower the ATP content of
cells increase their water content, and in the process, the water functions
differently, becoming more randomly arranged.  
  
The idea that the properties of water change as cell functions change
contradicts the common reductionist assumption that water is just the medium
in which molecular interactions occur. Since Kelvin's 1858 demonstration that
the heat capacity of water changes with its shape, and Drost-Hansen's
demonstrations that its density decreases near surfaces, attention to the
physical properties of water has made it possible to understand many
biological mysteries, such as the decrease of volume (Abbott and Baskin, 1962)
when a nerve or muscle cell is excited. Although the invention of the MRI grew
directly from Damadian's understanding of water's centrality to biology's most
important issues, the technology's most important contributions, related to
changes in water structure, haven't been recognized, understood, or
assimilated by medicine.  
  
The electrical properties of the protein framework of a cell interact with the
state of the water in the cell, and with the things dissolved in the water,
including phosphate, calcium, sodium, and potassium. Actin, one of the major
muscle proteins, forms a meshwork in the cytoplasm of lens fiber cells, and
myosin, the other major muscle protein, has been found in association with the
actin (Al-Ghoul, et al., 2010). ATP (alternating with ADP+inorganic phosphate)
is involved in muscle contraction and relaxation, and it is involved in the
conversion of actin from a filament into a globular form. Changes in the
amount of ATP and ADP are important for influencing the interactions of water
and proteins.  
  
The actin skeleton is involved in the fiber cell's elongation as it develops
from a roundish epithelial cell, and it's probably responsible for the ability
of lens cells to contract when stimulated (Oppitz, et al., 2003; Andjelica, et
al., 2011). These muscle-like effects of actin are believed to be responsible
for the movement of organelles and other cell motion, such as cytoplasmic
streaming. But, as a major part of the cell's structure, it could also be
expected to act as the framework for electroosmotic flow of water, accounting
for the circulation that maintains the cell's energy. The observed static
electrical properties of lens cell fragments could account for a complete
daily renewal of the fluid (Pasquale, et al., 1990), but the metabolic
gradients in whole cells would probably cause faster flow.  
  
With oxidative energy production occurring in the surface cells, an electrical
gradient will be created, causing water to flow away from the site of
respiration. (Electroosmosis probably also accounts for the somewhat
mysterious exit of water from the eyeball and brain, in perivascular flow.)
The flow of water through these cells is very fast, but Ichiji Tasaki has
demonstrated similarly fast movement of water in nerves and artificial
polymers in association with electrical activity (2002; Tasaki and Iwasa,
1981, 1982; Iwasa, et al., 1980).  
  
At least since Gullstrand's unfounded assertions in his 1911 Nobel lecture, it
has been assumed that the lens, like a water-filled balloon, keeps the same
volume when it flattens, for distant focus. Zamudio, et al. (2008), have shown
that "â€¦the lens volume decreases as the lens flattens during unaccommodation."
"The lens volume always decreases as the lens flattens." They determined that
"â€¦the changes in lens volume, as reflected by the speed of the equatorial
diameter recovery in _in vitro_ cow and rabbit lenses during simulated
accommodation, occurred within a physiologically relevant time frame (200 ms),
implying a rapid movement of fluid to and from the lens during accommodation."
This is the duration of the action potential of healthy heart muscle, though
it's probably not as fast as the very superficial changes that Tasaki saw in
nerves. It's the sort of change rate that could be expected in an organ whose
change of shape is the result of stimulation. Accommodation, with this
immediate hydration, is produced by cholinergic stimulation, and in the
healthy lens this hydration is rapidly reversible, as the stimulating
acetylcholine disappears and the lens flattens.  
  
The failing heart muscle, unable to relax fully, becomes harder as its water
content increases, and cancer cells, locked into a contracted excited state,
become stiffer as their water content increases. Similarly, cataracts have
been described as more rigid than normal lens tissue (Heys and Truscott, 2008;
Hu, et al., 2000), yet their water content is higher (Racz, et al., 2000).
Along with the increased water, the stressed cells take up very large amounts
of calcium, and sodium increases while potassium decreases. Inorganic
phosphate increases in the stressed cells, some of it entering with the
circulating fluid, but some of it produced from the ATP which is decreasing.
Serotonin, iron, lipid peroxidation products, nitric oxide, and prostaglandin
are also increased. The increased calcium activates proteolytic enzymes that
break down protein.  
  
In the failing heart and growing tumors, there is an increase in the quantity
and the cross-linking of collagen in the extracellular matrix, contributing to
the overall hardness, besides the contracted state of the cells themselves. In
the cataract, cross-linking of various proteins, including collagen, also
seems to be involved in the problem, along with the altered state of the water
(Mishra, et al., 1997; Eldred, et al., 2011). The cross-linking enzyme
transglutaminase is induced by stressors such as ultraviolet light which
produce cataracts.  
  
When the available energy doesn't meet the cell's energy requirements, if the
cell isn't quickly killed by the stress it will use some adaptive mechanisms,
stopping some repair processes to reduce energy expenditure, possibly stopping
specialized functions to reduce energy needs. Fibrotic changes occur as a
result of defensive reactions in stressed cells, usually following long
periods of fatigue and inflammation. Cortisol generally protects cells by
blocking over-stimulation and providing increased material for energy and
repair, but it can kill cells (nerve cells and thymus cells) that depend on
glucose oxidation, leading to immunodeficiency and excitotoxic brain damage.
The glucose-dependent lens fiber cells express the same glucose transporters,
GLUT1 and GLUT3, as the brain, and the "nerve specific" GLUT3 is concentrated
in the dense nucleus of the lens (Donaldson, et al., 2003). Exposure to
excessive cortisol or hypoglycemia is able to quickly produce cataracts,
showing the basic importance of glucose metabolism for lens health.  
  
Oxidative metabolism in the surface cells is probably largely responsible for
the streaming of fluid through the fiber cells, providing some ATP and the
nutrients that allow the fiber cells to maintain and repair their structure,
but I suspect that local metabolism of glucose by the fiber cells provides
most of the energy for keeping the protein-water system in its orderly relaxed
state.  
  
The aging lens, like all normal tissues, is drier, has a lower water content,
than younger tissues, but when a cataract begins to develop, there is a sharp
increase in the water content in that area, something that happens in any
excited or fatigued tissue. (In a stimulated nerve or muscle, for example,
although in a closed system there would be a slight decrease in volume as its
water becomes relatively randomized, there is normally a sudden absorption of
water from the extracellular space, where the water has the same random
organization.) With the decreasing energy charge of the cell, represented by
decreasing ATP and increasing ADP and inorganic phosphate, the long range
order of the water decreases, changing the activity of enzymes in a variety of
ways, for example by the exchange of a high magnesium content for a high
calcium content. While the renewal of proteins decreases because of an energy
deficit, the activation of proteolytic enzymes by calcium degrades the cell
architecture and the crystallin that makes up about 90% of the cell's protein,
and these damaged proteins become progressively cross-linked, in a process
analogous to the cross-linking of collagen in sun-damaged skin, or in cancer
or a fibrotic failing heart.  
  
The diffusion of water in these congested cataract areas becomes random, more
like ordinary bulk water, and it's likely that this randomization of the
water, along with the architectural disorganization of proteins and changing
electrical fields, impedes the longitudinal flow of nourishing fluid through
the lens. MRI studies show relatively free diffusion of water longitudinally
in the lens fiber cells from front to back, but not transversely (Moffat and
Pope, 2002). Water that's highly ordered by nearby surfaces can still be very
mobile parallel to the surface.  
  
The parasympathetic nerve transmitter acetylcholine is formed in the lens, as
well as its receptor and the enzyme which destroys it, cholinesterase.
Chemicals that inhibit cholinesterase, and drugs that mimic the action of
acetylcholine on the receptor, cause cataracts. These drugs (Michon and
Kinoshita, 1968; Harkonen and Tarkkanen, 1976) cause the lens to take up
water, sodium, and calcium, and to lose potassium, and by increasing the
cells' energy expenditure, they accelerate the consumption of glucose while
blocking other metabolism. Since these are known effects of stimulation by
acetylcholine, it's reasonable to assume that acetylcholine is involved in the
natural formation of cataracts.  
  
Besides the direct excitatory effects of acetylcholine, the increase of
intracellular calcium and decrease of magnesium (Agarwal, et al., 2012) caused
by it promote the synthesis of nitric oxide (which, for example, blocks the
function of cytochrome oxidase, reducing the production of ATP), and the
interference with glucose metabolism in itself is cataractogenic (Greiner, et
al., 1981).  
  
Ultraviolet light powerfully stimulates the formation of nitric oxide
(Chaudhry, et al., 1993), and is one of the known causes of cataracts. Since
the cornea is more directly exposed than the lens to the ultraviolet rays of
sunlight, the effects of injury can be seen more quickly. Exposure of the
cornea to ultraviolet light causes swelling, reduced transparency, and the
formation of nitric oxide, which enters the aqueous humor (Cejka, et al.,
2012; Cejkova, et al., 2005). Swelling in itself, regardless of the cause,
decreases the transparency of the cornea (Stevenson, et al., 1983); anything
interfering with its energy metabolism causes swelling.  
  
The blue color of ordinary water is caused by its absorption of red light,
possibly by its hydrogen bonds (Braun and Smirnov, 1993), but there haven't
been many studies of the physical effects of red light on water itself. Since
water absorbs much more strongly in the infrared wavelengths, there is a
tendency to explain the benefits of sunlight by its infrared rays. Red and
orange wavelengths penetrate tissue very effectively, because of their weaker
absorption by water, allowing them to react with pigments in the cell, such as
cytochrome oxidase, which is activated (or re-activated) by red light,
increasing the production of ATP. This effect counteracts the toxic effects of
ultraviolet light, but there are probably other mechanisms involved in the
many beneficial effects of red light.  
  
Recent work by a group at the University of Ulm in Germany (Andrei Sommer, et
al., 2011) has revealed an effect of red light (670 nm) on water that I think
helps to explain some of its protective and restorative actions. Shining laser
light onto layers of water adsorbed on a solid surface, they were able to show
"a breathing-like volume expansion of the topmost sheets of water molecules."
They explain this as the result of a stabilization of a more ordered state of
the hydrogen bonds of the water. They are applying this to chemotherapy, since
the expansion of water in the cell where much of the water is in adsorbed
layers similar to their experimental set-up, alternating with its volume
contraction as the light is pulsed, causes water to move in and out of the
cell quickly, taking some of the drug with it. They have also proposed that
degenerative changes in the connective tissues involve a loss of ordered
water, and have experimented with light treatments to restore elasticity and
flexibility.  
  
Since the water in cataracts is in a less ordered state than in the
transparent lens, the re-ordering effect of red light could be valuable, and
if the effects are the same as in their experiments with cancer cells, the
increased volume of the re-ordered water would cause a movement of water out
of the cataract, as it does in cancer cells in their experiment. And the known
restorative effect of red light on oxidative production of ATP would almost
certainly be helpful.  
  
Among the popular medical treatments that are likely to contribute to the
development of cataract are glucocorticoids, and drugs that increase serotonin
(Dietze and Tilgner, 1973; Korsakova and Sergeeva, 2010), and drugs that
increase nitric oxide. Free fatty acids are toxic to the lens, which contains
the enzymes for synthesizing prostaglandins and related promoters of
inflammation; the products of lipid peroxidation are increased in people with
cataracts. Endotoxin from the intestine increases the formation of nitric
oxide, so it's essential to minimize intestinal inflammation.  
  
High altitude very strongly protects against cataracts (Brilliant, et al.,
1983). Low oxygen tension itself protects the lens's clarity (Akoyev, et al.,
2009), possibly by the protective effect of increased carbon dioxide against
glycation of protein amino groups. Aspirin's known anticataract effect
apparently involves a similar protection of crystallin against glycation, but
aspirin has several other protective effects, including prevention of protein
cross-linking, and the inhibition of the synthesis of nitric oxide and
prostaglandins and other disruptive materials (Crabbe, 1998; Beachy, et al.,
1987; Lonchampt, et al., 1983). Progesterone's inhibition of nitric oxide
production is probably protective for the lens, paralleling its effects in
other organs. Inhibitors of nitric oxide, such as aminoguanidine, are
protective. Anticholinergics, including atropine, inhibit over-hydration of
the lens and prevent cataracts caused by excessive cholinergic stimulation
(e.g., Kaufman, et al., 1977). Caffeine, in animal experiments, prevents
cataracts. Uric acid, which inhibits nitric oxide formation, is reduced in
people with cataracts. The factors that prevent or promote other degenerative
diseases are similarly protective or harmful for the lens.  
  
REFERENCES  
J Physiology 1962; 161, 379-391. Volume changes in frog muscle during
contraction. Abbott C & Baskin RJ.  
Exp Eye Res. 2012 Aug;101:82-9. Magnesium deficiency: does it have a role to
play in cataractogenesis? Agarwal R, Iezhitsa I, Agarwal P, Spasov A.  
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Mar;50(3):1271-82. Hypoxia-regulated activity
of PKCepsilon in the lens. Akoyev V, Das S, Jena S, Grauer L, Takemoto DJ.  
Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2010 Nov;293(11):1805-15. A novel terminal web-like
structure in cortical lens fibers: architecture and functional assessment. Al-
Ghoul KJ, Lindquist TP, Kirk SS, Donohue ST.  
Acta Ophthalmol. 2011 Dec;89(8):e645-53. Human anterior lens capsule
epithelial cells ontraction. Andjelic S, Zupancic G, PerovÅ¡ek D, Hawlina M.  
Prostaglandins Leukot Med. 1983 Apr;10(4):381-7. Evidence of leukotriene B4
biosynthesis in epithelial lens cells. Lonchampt MO, Bonne C, Regnault F,
MassÃƒÂ© JP, Coquelet C, Sincholle D.  
Photochem Photobiol. 1987 May;45(5):677-8. Photoperoxidation of lens lipids:
inhibition by aspirin. Beachy NA, Morris SM, Richards RD, Varma SD.  
J. Chem. Edu., 1993, 70(8), 612, Why is water blue? Braun CL and Smirnov SN.  
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 1983;3(1):33-9. Corneal transparency changes resulting
from osmotic stress. Stevenson R, Vaja N, Jackson J.  
Am J Epidemiol. 1983 Aug;118(2):250-64. Associations among cataract
prevalence, sunlight hours, and altitude in the Himalayas. Brilliant LB,
Grasset NC, Pokhrel RP, Kolstad A, Lepkowski JM, Brilliant GE, Hawks WN,
Pararajasegaram R.  
Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1998 Nov;44(7):1047-50. Cataract as a
conformational disease--the Maillard reaction, alpha-crystallin and
chemotherapy. Crabbe MJ.  
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2004 Dec;31(12):890-5. Functional imaging: new
views on lens structure and function. Donaldson PJ, Grey AC, Merriman-Smith
BR, Sisley AM, Soeller C, Cannell MB, Jacobs MD.  
Physiol Res. 2012 Jul 20;61(3):299-306. Central corneal thickness considered
an index of corneal hydration of the UVB irradiated rabbit cornea as
influenced by UVB absorber. Cejka C, Luyckx J, Cejkova J.  
Histol Histopathol. 2005 Apr;20(2):467-73. Irradiation of the rabbit cornea
with UVB rays stimulates the expression of nitric oxide synthases-generated
nitric oxide and the formation of cytotoxic nitrogen-related oxidants. Cejkova
J, Ardan T, Cejka C, Kovaceva J, Zidek Z.  
Photochem Photobiol. 1993 Nov;58(5):661-9. Relaxation of vascular smooth
muscle induced by low-power laser radiation. Chaudhry H, Lynch M, Schomacker
K, Birngruber R, Gregory K, Kochevar I.  
Ophthalmologica. 1973;166(1):76-80. [Reversible lens opacity in Wistar rats
following single administration of serotonin]. [Article in German] Dietze U,
Tilgner S.  
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2011 Apr 27;366(1568):1301-19. The lens as
a model for fibrotic disease. Eldred JA, Dawes LJ, Wormstone IM.  
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 Nov;41(12):3943-54. Cataractogenic lens injury
prevents traumatic ganglion cell death and promotes axonal regeneration both
in vivo and in culture. Fischer D, Pavlidis M, Thanos S.  
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1981 Nov;21(5):700-13. Organophosphates of the
crystalline lens: a nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic study. Greiner
JV, Kopp SJ, Sanders DR, Glonek T.  
Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh). 1976 Aug;54(4):445-55. Effects of phospholine iodide
on the metabolites of the glycolytic, pentose phosphate and sorbitol pathways
in the rabbit lens. Harkonen M, Tarkkanen A.  
Exp Eye Res. 2008 Apr;86(4):701-3. The stiffness of human cataract lenses is a
function of both age and the type of cataract. Heys KR, Truscott RJ.  
Arch Ophthalmol. 1977 Jul;95(7):1262-8. Atropine inhibition of echothiophate
cataractogenesis in monkeys. Kaufman PL, Axelsson U, Barany EH.  
Vestn Oftalmol. 2010 Jan-Feb;126(1):32-5. [The bioamine profile of the lens
during the development of different types of human age-related
cataract].[Article in Russian]Korsakova NV, Sergeeva VE.  
American Journal of Psychiatry, 1953;110(4):281-289. Patterns of behavior
disturbance following cataract extraction. Linn L, Kahn RL, Coles R, Cohen J,
Marshall D, Weinstein EA.  
Arch Ophthalmol. 1967 Jun;77(6):804-8. Cholinesterase in the lens. Michon J
Jr, Kinoshita JH.  
Arch Ophthalmol. 1968 Jan;79(1):79-86. Experimental miotic cataract. I.
Effects of miotics on lens structure, cation content, and hydration. Michon J
Jr, Kinoshita JH.  
Indian J Ophthalmol. 1997 Dec;45(4):227-31. Possible role of lens collagen in
cataractogenesis. Mishra G, Das GB, Behera HN.  
Nihon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1993 Oct;97(10):1157-64. [Magnetic resonance
imaging study on rat sugar cataract]. Mori K.  
Toxicology. 2007 Dec 5;242(1-3):7-15. Adverse effects of excessive nitric
oxide on cytochrome c oxidase in lenses of hereditary cataract UPL rats. Nagai
N, Ito Y.  
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Nov;44(11):4813-9. Ca2+-mobilization and cell
contraction after muscarinic cholinergic stimulation of the chick embryo lens.
Oppitz M, Mack A, Drews U.  
Exp Eye Res. 1992 May;54(5):807-11. A reassessment of protein synthesis by
lens nuclear fiber cells. Lieska N, Krotzer K, Yang HY.  
Exp Eye Res. 2004 Mar;78(3):689-98. The lens: local transport and global
transparency. Mathias RT, Rae JL.  
Exp Eye Res. 2002 Jun;74(6):677-87. Anisotropic water transport in the human
eye lens studied by diffusion tensor NMR micro-imaging. Moffat BA, Pope JM.  
Exp Eye Res. 1985 Oct;41(4):569-75. Protein synthesis in bovine and human
nuclear fiber cells.  
Ozaki L, Jap P, Bloemendal H.  
Biophys J. 1990 Oct;58(4):939-45. Electrostatic properties of fiber cell
membranes from the frog lens. Pasquale LR, Mathias RT, Austin LR, Brink PR,
Ciunga M.  
Exp Eye Res. 2000 Apr;70(4):529-36. 1H spin-spin relaxation in normal and
cataractous human, normal fish and bird eye lenses. Racz P, Hargitai C,
Alfoldy B, Banki P, Tompa K.  
Ophthalmologica. 2000;214(6):390-8. High hurdle of clinical trials to
demonstrate efficacy of anticataractogenic drugs. Sasaki K, Hockwin O,
Sakamoto Y, Sasaki H, Kojima M.  
J Cell Sci. 2000 Jun;113 ( Pt 11):1913-21. Expression of autofluorescent
proteins reveals a novel protein permeable pathway between cells in the lens
core. Shestopalov VI, Bassnett S.  
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2011, 2, 562Â­565, Breathing Volume into Interfacial Water
with Laser Light, Sommer AP, Hodeck KF, Zhu D, Kothe A, Lange KM, Fecht H-J,
Aziz EF.  
Mol Vis. 2013;19:463-75. Carbon turnover in the water-soluble protein of the
adult human lens.  
Stewart DN, Lango J, Nambiar KP, Falso MJ, FitzGerald PG, Rocke DM, Hammock
BD, Buchholz BA.  
D.N.Stewart, 2008 dissertation UC Davis, Existence of protein turnover in
adult human nuclear fiber cells.  
J Theor Biol 218(4): 497-505, Oct 2002. Spread of discrete structural changes
in synthetic polyanionic gel: a model of propagation of a nerve impulse.
Tasaki I.  
J Physiol (Paris) 77: 1055-1059, 1981. Rapid mechanical changes in crab nerve
and squid axon during action potentials. Tasaki I and Iwasa K.  
Ups J Med Sci. 1980;85(3):211-5. Swelling of nerve fibers during action
potentials. Tasaki I, Iwasa K.  
Science 210: 338-339, 1980. Swelling of nerve fibers associated with action
potentials. Iwasa K, Tasaki, I, and Gibbons RC.  
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Jun;294(6):C1430-5. Surface change of the
mammalian lens during accommodation. Zamudio AC, Candia OA, Kong CW, Wu B,
Gerometta R.  
Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2000 Sep;36(5):337-40. [The nuclear hardness and
associated factors of age-related cataract]. [Article in Chinese] Hu C, Zhang
X, Hui Y.

  
Â© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2014. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

