![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Cholesterol, longevity, intelligence, and health.**  
  
**The biological meaning of cholesterol is just starting to be explored.  
Everything that doctors know about cholesterol is wrong.  
New information about cholesterol is clarifying important issues in physiology
and pathology.  
**  
Medical magazines and television stations like to propagate the idea that
cholesterol is bad stuff, and as a result, that cliche is known to almost
every American. Recent journal articles have promoted the idea that "the lower
the serum cholesterol is, the better" it is for the health of the patient.  
  
The theory that heart disease is "caused by cholesterol" has gone through
several stages, and most recently the use of the "statin" drugs has revived it
in a radical way. One consistent theme for fifty years has been that people
should eat more polyunsaturated fat and less saturated fat, to lower their
cholesterol, and to avoid butter, cream, eggs, and "red meat," because they
contain both saturated fat and cholesterol. Often, medical attention is
focused on the fats in the atheroma, rather than on the whole disease process,
including clotting factors, vascular spasms, heart rhythm, viscosity of the
blood, deposition of calcium and iron in blood vessels, and the whole process
of inflammation, including the reactions to absorbed bowel toxins.  
  
Almost 100 years ago, some experiments in Russia showed that feeding rabbits
cholesterol caused them to develop atherosclerosis, but subsequent experiments
showed that rabbits are unusual in responding that way to cholesterol, and
that even rabbits don't develop atherosclerosis from cholesterol if they are
given a supplement of thyroid (Friedland, 1933). By 1936, it was clear that
hypercholesterolemia in humans and other animals was caused by hypothyroidism,
and that hypothyroidism caused many diseases to develop, including
cardiovascular disease and cancer. There was already more reason at that time
to think that the increased cholesterol was a protective adaptation than to
think that it was maladaptive.  
  
The strange idea that cholesterol causes atherosclerosis was revived in the
1950s when the vegetable oil industry learned that their polyunsaturated oils
lowered serum cholesterol. (Many other toxins lower cholesterol, but that is
never mentioned.) The industry began advertising their oils as "heart
protective," and they enlisted some influential organizations to help in their
advertising **:** The American Dietetic Association, the American Heart
Association, the US Dept. of Agriculture and FDA, and the AMA. Besides the
early rabbit research, which didn't make their case against cholesterol and
might actually have had implications harmful to their argument (since
Anitschkow had used vegetable oil as solvent for his cholesterol feedings),
the oil industry helped to create and promote a large amount of fraudulent and
unscientific work.  
  
The death rate from heart disease in the United States began increasing early
in the twentieth century, and it reached its peak from about 1950 to 1975, and
then began declining. During the decades in which the death rate was rising,
consumption of animal fat was decreasing, and the use of vegetable oil was
increasing. In the southern European countries that have been said to show
that eating very little animal fat prevents heart disease, the trends after
the second world war have been the opposite--they have been eating more animal
fat without an increase in heart disease.  
  
The correspondence between heart disease and consumption of saturated fat and
cholesterol is little more than advertising copy. If people were looking for
the actual causes of heart disease, they would consider the factors that
changed in the US during the time that heart disease mortality was increasing.
Both increases in harmful factors, and decreases in protective factors would
have to be considered.  
  
The consumption of manufactured foods, pollution of air and water, the use of
lead in gasoline, cigarette smoking, increased medicalization and use of
drugs, psychosocial and socioeconomic stress, and increased exposure to
radiation--medical, military, and industrial--would be obvious things to
consider, along with decreased intake of some protective nutrients, such as
selenium, magnesium, and vitamins.  
  
But those harmful factors all had their defenders **:** Who defends
socioeconomic stress? All of the social institutions that fail to alleviate
it. In 1847, Rudolph Virchow was sent to Poland to study the health situation
there, and when he returned, the highly regarded anatomist, physiologist and
pathologist announced that the Poles wouldn't have a health problem if the
government would stop oppressing them, and institute economic reforms to
alleviate their poverty. The reforms weren't made, and Virchow lost his job.
Other harmful factors, such as seed oils, degraded foods, and radiation, have
specific, very well organized and powerful lobbies to defend them.  
  
Despite the growing knowledge about the dangers of polyunsaturated fats, many
medical articles are still advocating the "official" heart protective diet
(e.g., " **...** diets using nonhydrogenated unsaturated fats as the
predominant form of dietary fat," Hu and Willet, 2002).  
  
Some dogs alertly look at the thing a person is pointing at, other dogs just
sniff the pointing finger. The publicists who disregard the complete
nutritional and ecological situation, to focus on cholesterol and fat in the
diet, are like the finger sniffers.  
  
Recent articles in the medical and lipids journals are praising the 1950 work
of J. W. Gofman, and the 1914 rabbit studies of N. N. Anitschkow, as the
research that revealed cholesterol to be the cause of heart disease.
Anitschkow and his co-workers, however, understood that their experiment
hadn't explained human heart disease, and John Gofman, about 50 years after
publishing his work on the lipoproteins, has done some large studies that
could be crucial in disproving the doctrine that has become almost a national
religion.  
  
He has shown that mortality from both heart disease and cancer corresponds
very closely to the population's exposure to medical services, and
specifically to medical radiation. During the peak years of heart disease
mortality, medical x-rays gave very large doses of radiation with each
exposure, and the population was also exposed to radioactive fallout from
atomic bomb testing (explosions from 1945 to 1963 produced a peak of heavy
fallout that persisted through the 'sixties and into the 'seventies).  
  
Around 1971, someone noticed that the commercial cholesterol being used in
feeding experiments was oxidized, that is, it wasn't really cholesterol.
Comparing carefully prepared, unoxidized cholesterol with the oxidized
degraded material, it was found that dietary cholesterol wasn't necessarily
atherogenic (Vine, et al., 1998).  
  
Dietitians often recommend eating poached salmon, rather than "red meat," to
lower cholesterol. Experimenters have measured the toxic oxidized cholesterol
in different foods prepared in a variety of ways. Steaming salmon produced
several times as much oxidized cholesterol as frying it, because of the longer
cooking time that allowed the polyunsaturated fatty acids to break down,
producing toxins such as acrolein and free radicals that oxidize the
cholesterol and other components of the fish. The toxic cholesterol content of
the steamed salmon was much higher than that of beef cooked at a high
temperature.  
  
When oxidized polyunsaturated oils, such as corn oil or linoleic acid, are
added to food, they appear in the blood lipids, where they accelerate the
formation of cholesterol deposits in arteries (Staprans, et al., 1994, 1996).  
  
Stress accelerates the oxidation of the polyunsaturated fatty acids in the
body, so people who consume unsaturated vegetable oils and fish will have some
oxidized cholesterol in their tissues. The constant turnover of cholesterol in
the tissues tends to lower the proportion of the toxic oxidized degradation
products of cholesterol, but in hypothyroidism, the use of cholesterol is
slowed, allowing the toxic forms to accumulate.  
  
Many antioxidant nutrients act like a thyroid supplement did in the 1934
rabbit experiments, preventing atherosclerosis even when extra toxic
cholesterol is given to the animals. People who eat seafood get much more
selenium in their diet than people who eat nothing from the sea, and selenium
is one of the extremely protective nutrients that prevent atherosclerosis in
animal experiments with excess cholesterol.  
  
It is well established that several antioxidant nutrients are protective
factors in heart disease. The medical establishment has expended a great
amount of money and time in the last 60 years fighting the use of vitamin E or
selenium for treating or preventing heart disease, though many physicians now
take vitamin E themselves. But people who study free radical chemistry
recognize that polyunsaturated fats are highly susceptible to oxidation, and
that saturated fats tend to slow their degradation, acting to some extent as
antioxidants. Several experiments and observations have shown that cholesterol
itself can protect against damaging oxidation of polyunsaturated fats,
protecting DNA and other vital components of the cell. A consistent program to
prevent the oxidation of cholesterol would have to include all of the vitamins
and minerals that are involved in antioxidant defense, avoidance of nutrients
that exacerbate the destructive oxidations, and an effort to normalize the
hormones and other factors, such as carbon dioxide, that have protective
effects against free radical oxidation. A low level of cholesterol might
increase susceptibility to the oxidants.  
  
The steroids in general, especially those produced in large amounts,
progesterone and DHEA, are important parts of the antioxidant defenses.
Cholesterol, either that produced internally by the cell, or taken in from the
blood stream, is the precursor for all the steroids in the body. Several of
the major steroid hormones are antiinflammatory, and cholesterol itself is
antiinflammatory. (Mikko, et al., 2002; Kreines, et al., 1990). Cholesterol
also protects against radiation damage, and many forms of toxin (saponins,
cobra venom, chloroform--W.G. MacCallum, _A Text-book of_ _Pathology,_ 1937,
Saunders Co.; many more recent studies show that it protects blood cells
against hemolysis--breakdown of red blood cells--caused by heat and other
harmful agents; e.g., Dumas, et al., 2002, Velardi, et al., 1991).
Cholesterol, vitamin E, progesterone, and vitamin D are considered to be
"structural antioxidants," that prevent oxidation partly by stabilizing
molecular structures. One of the basic functions of cholesterol seems to be
the stabilization of mitochondria, preventing their destruction by stress.
Serious stress lowers ATP, magnesium, and carbon dioxide. When ATP and
intracellular magnesium are decreased, cholesterol synthesis increases.  
  
During stress, free fatty acids are released from the tissues, and circulating
in the bloodstream they are highly susceptible to oxidation. They contribute
to the formation of the age pigment, lipofuscin, which is an oxygen-wasting
substance that's found in the atheroma plaques in the damaged blood vessels.
Iron and calcium accumulation adds to the tissue damage.  
  
The hemolysis which is promoted by polyunsaturated fats and an imbalance of
antioxidants and oxidants, releases iron and heme into the blood stream. The
incidence of atherosclerosis is increased when the body iron stores are high
(Kiechl, et al., 1997), probably because of its role in lipid peroxidation and
lipofuscin formation.  
  
Especially when the lining of the blood vessel is too permeable, because of
the influence of polyunsaturated fats, prostaglandins, estrogen, etc., the
heme and iron will enter the endothelial cells, where the iron will catalyze
the formation of free radicals, and the heme will be broken down by the enzyme
heme oxygenase, into biliverdin, iron, and carbon monoxide, which can
contribute to the oxidative stress of the cells. Carbon monoxide makes the
blood vessel lining more permeable, allowing fats and fibrinogen to enter the
cells (Allen, et al., 1988).  
  
Although cholesterol is protective against oxidative and cytolytic damage, the
chronic free radical exposure will oxidize it. During the low cholesterol
turnover of hypothyroidism, the oxidized variants of cholesterol will
accumulate, so cholesterol loses its protective functions.  
  
When the metabolic pathways of the steroid hormones were being worked out, an
experimenter perfused an isolated ovary with blood. When the amount of
cholesterol in the blood pumped into the ovary was increased, the amount of
progesterone in the blood leaving the ovary increased proportionately. In the
healthy organism, cholesterol is constantly being synthesized, and constantly
converted into steroid hormones, and, in the liver, into the bile salts that
are secreted to emulsify fats in the intestine. Thyroid hormone and vitamin A
are used in the process of converting cholesterol into pregnenolone, the
immediate precursor of progesterone and DHEA. Anything that interfered with
these processes would be disastrous for the organism. The supply of
cholesterol, thyroid and vitamin A must always be adequate for the production
of steroid hormones and bile salts. When stress suppresses thyroid activity,
increased cholesterol probably compensates to some extent by permitting more
progesterone to be synthesized.  
  
In very young people, the metabolic rate is very high, and the rapid
conversion of cholesterol into pregnenolone, DHEA, and progesterone usually
keeps the level of cholesterol in the blood low. In the 1930s, a rise in the
concentration of cholesterol was considered to be one of the most reliable
ways to diagnose hypothyroidism ( _1936 Yearbook of Neurology, Psychiatry, and
Endocrinology,_ E.L. Sevringhaus, editor, Chicago, p. 533). With aging, the
metabolic rate declines, and the increase of cholesterol with aging is
probably a spontaneous regulatory process, supporting the synthesis of the
protective steroids, especially the neurosteroids in the brain and retina.  
  
Many people refer to the structural importance of cholesterol for "membranes,"
and often imply that the membranes are just at the surface of the cell (the
plasma membrane). But in fact cholesterol is found in the nucleus in the
chromosomes, bound to DNA and in the nuclear matrix that governs the
activation of genes, and in the mitotic spindle, which regulates separation of
the chromosomes during cell division **:** without sufficient cholesterol,
cells divide irregularly, producing aneuploid daughter cells (i.e., they have
an abnormal number of chromosomes). Aneuploidy is now coming to be recognized
as an essential feature of cancer cells. A significant amount of cholesterol
was recently discovered to bind to hemoglobin, suggesting that it will be
found in association with many other types of protein, when it occurs to
anyone to look for it. Osmotic regulation, which is closely involved in cell
division and other functions, appears to require cholesterol synthesis.  
  
Around 1985, a big study in Hungary showed that lowering cholesterol with
drugs caused a huge increase in the cancer death rate. Hundreds of
publications appeared in the U.S. saying that wasn't possible, because low
cholesterol is good, the lower the better. The extreme increase in cancer
mortality in the Hungarian study was probably the result of the drug that was
commonly used at that time to lower cholesterol, but the pattern of mortality
in that study was approximately the same pattern seen in any group with very
low cholesterol. In the last 20 years, there have been many studies showing
that lowering cholesterol increases mortality, especially from cancer and
suicide, and that people with naturally low cholesterol are more likely to die
from cancer, suicide, trauma, and infections than people with normal or higher
than average cholesterol.  
  
The increased mortality from accidents and suicide when cholesterol is lowered
is reminiscent of the problems seen in progesterone deficiency, and it's very
likely that a deficiency of the neurosteroids accounts for it. A deficiency of
progesterone and other neurosteroids (the steroids synthesized by the nerves
themselves) causes depression of mood and impaired learning ability, among
other neurological changes. As was the case with cancer, the pharmaceutical
industry continues to deny that their anticholesterol drugs cause suicide,
depression, and dementia, but there is a large amount of evidence from human
as well as animal studies showing that mood and intelligence are depressed by
lowering cholesterol. Simply injecting cholesterol into animals can improve
their learning ability. In the Framingham heart study of 1894 people extending
over a period of about 20 years, people with cholesterol naturally in the
"desirable" range, below 200 mg.%, scored lower on "verbal fluency,
attention/concentration, abstract reasoning, and a composite score measuring
multiple cognitive domains" than those with higher cholesterol (Elias, et al.,
2005).  
  
After the age of fifty, low cholesterol is clearly associated with an
increased risk of dying from a variety of causes. A study of old women
indicated that a cholesterol level of 270 mg. per 100 ml. was associated with
the best longevity (Forette, et al., 1989). "Mortality was lowest at serum
cholesterol 7.0 mmol/l [=270.6 mg%], 5.2 times higher than the minimum at
serum cholesterol 4.0 mmol/l, and only 1.8 times higher when cholesterol
concentration was 8.8 mmol/l. This relation held true irrespective of age,
even when blood pressure, body weight, history of myocardial infarction,
creatinine clearance, and plasma proteins were taken into account."  
  
The next step in studies of this sort should be to see how the combination of
extra thyroid with adequate cholesterol influences longevity. The rising
cholesterol that commonly occurs with aging is probably only partial
compensation for declining thyroid function, and by optimizing all of the
protective factors, radical changes in the aging process may be possible.  
  
In the roundworm C. elegans, which is now a very popular animal for testing
aging theories, because its genes and cells have been thoroughly "mapped," it
was recently found that adding a gene that simply allows it to synthesize
cholesterol, rather than depending on food for its sterols, increased its life
span by as much as 131% (Lee, et al., 2005). That would be like increasing the
human lifespan to about 175 years. These worms are also more resistant than
normal to radiation and heat stress.  
  
The cells of the thymus are extremely sensitive to radiation and other
stressors, and their enrichment with cholesterol inhibits lipid peroxidation,
DNA degradation, and death in response to radiation (Posokhov, et al., 1992).  
  
Many high altitude regions of the world have high levels of background
radiation, from minerals as well as cosmic rays, so it has been dogmatically
believed that mortality from cancer and heart disease would increase with
altitude, but the reverse is true. Because oxygen at lower pressure displaces
less carbon dioxide from the blood, the body is able to retain more carbon
dioxide at high altitude. Carbon dioxide protects against free radicals, and
also helps to deliver oxygen to tissues, to maintain efficient energy
production, and to prevent cellular stress. One study found 18 times higher
incidence of hypertension in low altitude populations than in high altitude
people (Fiori, et al., 2000). For many years, these principles have been
applied in treating atherosclerosis and other degenerative diseases, in high
altitude health resorts. Even a short period of hypoxic treatment can improve
the body's ability to eliminate atherogenic lipid peroxides, possibly by
improving the stress-resistant functions of the liver (Meerson, et al., 1988;
Aleshin, et al., 1993; Kitaev, et al., 1999).  
  
I think editors of medical journals generally see themselves as the purveyors
of enlightenment, i.e., as the pushers of the stylish and prestigious
doctrines. (Selectivity of evidence to serve the received doctrine is the
commonest form of scientific dishonesty.) But because their mental framework
is culturally narrow, they sometimes publish things which later could turn out
to be embarrassing (if inconsistency could embarrass such types).  
  
The recent discovery that the size of the LDL particle is a predominant factor
in the development of atherosclerosis is one of those things that the editors
and medical professors should find embarrassing.  
  
Smaller lipoprotein particles have a greater surface area exposed to the
oxidative factors in the serum, and so are more rapidly degraded into toxic
substances. People with larger LDL particles are remarkably resistant to heart
disease, and the drug companies are looking for a way to turn their
lipoproteins into products. But the conditions that govern the size of the LDL
particles are physically and chemically reasonable, and are causing confusion
among the doctinaire.  
  
There have been several studies in India showing that consumption of butter
and ghee is associated with a low incidence of heart disease; for example,
according to one study, people in the north eat 19 times more fat (mostly
butter and ghee) than in the south, yet the incidence of heart disease is
seven times higher in the south. A study in Sweden found that the fatty acids
in milk products are associated with larger LDL particles (Sjogren, et al.,
2004).  
  
In a 35 day study, when butter (20% of the calories) was compared to various
kinds of margarine (with more trans fatty acids) in a similar quantity, the
LDL particles were bigger on the butter diet (Mauger, et al., 2003). But in a
study of the habitual diet of 414 people, large LDL particles were found to be
correlated with increased intake of protein, animal fat, and trans fatty acids
(Kim and Campos, 2003).  
  
In a study of the effect of dietary cholesterol on the atherogenicity of the
blood lipids, 52 people were given either an egg diet (with 640 mg. of extra
cholesterol per day) or a placebo diet for 30 days. Those whose LDL increased
the most on the high cholesterol diet had the largest LDL particle size
(Herron, et al., 2004). They concluded that "these data indicate that the
consumption of a high-cholesterol diet does not negatively influence the
atherogenicity of the LDL particle." A similar study in Mexico found that
"Intake of 2 eggs/d results in the maintenance of LDL:HDL and in the
generation of a less atherogenic LDL in this population of Mexican children"
(Ballesteros, et al., 2004).  
  
The estrogen industry tried to get into the heart disease business several
times over the last half century, and they are still trying, but the issue of
estrogen's harmful effects on LDL particle size is getting some attention.
Estrogen clearly decreases the size of the LDL particles (Campos, et al.,
1997). The LDL particles also get smaller at menopause, and in polycystic
ovary syndrome, and in preeclamptic pregnancies, all of which involve a low
ratio of progesterone to estrogen. But there are still journals publishing
claims that estrogen will protect against heart disease, by reducing the
atherogenic response in increasingly mysterious ways. Occasionally, people
have argued not only that estrogen is the factor that protects women against
heart attacks, but that androgens predispose men to heart disease. One of
their arguments has been that androgens lower HDL, the "good" form of
cholesterol. However, there are many studies that show that testosterone and
DHEA (Arad, et al., 1989) are protective against atherosclerosis. The LDL
particle size is increased by androgens, and postprandial triglyceridemia is
decreased (Hislop, et al., 2001).  
  
The studies in the 1930s that showed the protective effects of thyroid hormone
against atherosclerosis and heart disease have sometimes been interpreted to
mean that the thyroid is protective **_because_** it lowers the cholesterol,
but since cholesterol is protective, rather than harmful, something else
explains the protective effect. Ever since the time of Virchow, who called
atherosclerosis **_arteritis deformans,_** the inflammatory nature of the
problem has been clear to those who aren't crazed by the anticholesterol cult.
We are all subject to a variable degree of inflammatory stimulation from the
endotoxin absorbed from the intestine, but a healthy liver normally prevents
it from reaching the general circulation, and produces a variety of protective
factors. The HDL lipoprotein is one of these, which protects against
inflammation by binding bacterial endotoxins that have reached the
bloodstream. (Things that increase absorption of endotoxin--exercise,
estrogen, ethanol--cause HDL to rise.) Chylomicrons and VLDL also absorb,
bind, and help to eliminate endotoxins. All sorts of stress and malnutrition
increase the tendency of endotoxin to leak into the bloodstream. Thyroid
hormone, by increasing the turnover of cholesterol and its conversion into the
protective steroids, is a major factor in keeping the inflammatory processes
under control.  
  
In hypothyroidism, the pituitary secretes more TSH to activate the thyroid
gland, but TSH itself has a variety of pro-inflammatory actions. The
C-reactive protein (CRP), which is recognized as a factor contributing to
atherosclerosis, is increased in association with TSH. CRP activates mast
cells, which are found in the atheroma plaques, to produce a variety of pro-
inflammatory substances, including histamine.  
  
The belief that cells are controlled by a plasma membrane, and that
cholesterol's main function is to participate in that membrane, has led to a
culture that treats cholesterol physiology with little curiosity. A different
perspective on the cell starts with a recognition of the lipophilic nature of
the structural proteins (not "membrane proteins," but things like
cytoskeleton-cytoplasmic ground substance, spindle, centrosome-centrioles,
nuclear matrix, etc.), with which lipids interact. Modifying an extremely
complex system, the living substance, cholesterol participates in complexity,
and must be investigated with subtlety. I suspect that the physiological
meaning of cholesterol has to do with movement, stability, differentiation,
memory, and sensitivity of the parts of the cells, that is, with everything
physiological.  
  
The functions of cholesterol parallel the functions of other sterols in plants
and other types of organism. Its functions have been refined and extended with
the development of other steroids, such as progesterone, as biological
requirements have evolved, but cholesterol is still at the center of this
system. To deliberately interfere with its synthesis, as contemporary medicine
does, reveals a terrible arrogance.  
  
Many participants in the cholesterol-lowering cult believe that they have
succeeded in hijacking our science culture, but when the patents on another
generation of their drugs have expired, the cult could begin to fade away.  
  
REFERENCES  
  
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Sep 13;1297(1):77-82. **Effect of cholesterol on
rhodopsin stability in disk membranes.** Albert AD, Boesze-Battaglia K, Paw Z,
Watts A, Epand RM.  
J Hepatol. 2003 May;38(5):623-8. **A possible role of cholesterol-
sphingomyelin /phosphatidylcholine in nuclear matrix during rat liver
regeneration.** Albi E, Cataldi S, Rossi G, Magni MV. **"In nuclear matrix,
cholesterol and sphingomyelin are respectively five and three times higher
than those present in chromatin; the amount of phosphatidylcholine, which it
is enriched in saturated fatty acids, is lower, thus indicating a less fluid
structure." "The nuclear matrix lipids are independent from chromatin lipids;
the ratio cholesterol-sphingomyelin /phosphatidylcholine is higher and, as a
consequence, nuclear matrix is less fluid in relation to DNA synthesis,
suggesting a specific role of nuclear matrix as a structure involved in DNA
duplication.**"  
Gynecol Endocrinol. 1997 Aug;11(4):281-8. **Impact of combined hormone
replacement therapy on serum lipid metabolism: new aspects.** Alexandersen P,
Haarbo J, Christiansen C.  
J Vasc Surg. 1988 Jan;7(1):139-52 **. The effect of cigarette smoke, nicotine,
and carbon monoxide on the permeability of the arterial wall.** Allen DR,
Browse NL, Rutt DL, Butler L, Fletcher C.  
Ziegler's Beitrage, 1913, lvi, 379; 1914, lvii, 201. Anitschkow, N.N.  
Arteriosclerosis. 1989 Mar-Apr;9(2):159-66. **Dehydroepiandrosterone feeding
prevents aortic fatty streak formation and cholesterol accumulation in
cholesterol-fed rabbit.** Arad Y, Badimon JJ, Badimon L, Hembree WC, Ginsberg
HN.  
Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 1995 Feb;81(2):47-52. **[The unknown physiological
role of carbon dioxide]** Baev VI, Vasil'eva IV, L'vov SN, Shugalei IV.  
Am J Clin Nutr. 2004 Oct;80(4):855-61. **Dietary cholesterol does not increase
biomarkers for chronic disease in a pediatric population from northern
Mexico.** Ballesteros MN, Cabrera RM, Saucedo Mdel S, Fernandez ML.  
Atherosclerosis. 2002 Jun;162(2):425-32. **Changes in LDL size and HDL
concentration in normal and preeclamptic pregnancies.** Belo L, Caslake M,
Gaffney D, Santos-Silva A, Pereira-Leite L, Quintanilha A, Rebelo I.  
J Clin Pharmacol. 1980 Aug-Sep;20(8-9):487-99. **Biochemical and histological
effects of intermittent carbon monoxide exposure in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca
fascicularis) in relation to atherosclerosis**. Bing RJ, Sarma JS, Weishaar R,
Rackl A, Pawlik G.  
Physiol Behav. 2004 Sep 30;82(4):703-11. **Hypercholesterolemic diet applied
to rat dams protects their offspring against cognitive deficits. Simulated
neonatal anoxia model.** Bohr I.  
Kardiologiia. 1980 Aug;20(8):48-52. **[Molecular mechanisms of the action of
antioxidants in treating cardiovascular diseases]** Burlakova EB.  
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Dec;82(12):3955-63. **Effect of estrogen on very
low density lipoprotein and low density lipoprotein subclass metabolism in
postmenopausal women.** Campos H, Walsh BW, Judge H, Sacks FM. Department of
Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
[hphac@gauss.bwh.harvard.edu](mailto:hphac@gauss.bwh.harvard.edu) **"Estrogen
decreases low density lipoprotein (LDL) particle size, and smaller LDL
particles are associated with coronary atherosclerosis.** **"  
**J Cell Mol Med. 2002 Oct-Dec;6(4):583-92. **Blood histamine is associated
with coronary artery disease, cardiac events and severity of inflammation and
atherosclerosis.** Clejan S, Japa S, Clemetson C, Hasabnis SS, David O, Talano
JV.  
J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 5;278(36):33928-35. Epub 2003 Jun 23. **Cholesterol
impairs the adenine nucleotide translocator-mediated mitochondrial
permeability transition through altered membrane fluidity.** Colell A, Garcia-
Ruiz C, Lluis JM, Coll O, Mari M, Fernandez-Checa JC.  
FEBS Lett. 2004 Feb 27;560(1-3):63-8. **Mitochondrial permeability transition
induced by reactive oxygen species is independent of cholesterol-regulated
membrane fluidity.** Colell A, Garcia-Ruiz C, Mari M, Fernandez-Checa JC.  
J Mal Vasc. 1996;21(3):181-4. **[Effect of cholesterol on the cellular
deformability and osmotic fragility of erythrocytes]** Dumas D, Didelon J,
Humbert JC, Gigout T, Rasia RJ, Stoltz JF.  
Psychosom Med. 2005 Jan-Feb;67(1):24-30. **Serum cholesterol and cognitive
performance in the framingham heart study.** Elias PK, Elias MF, D'Agostino
RB, Sullivan LM, Wolf PA.  
J Neurochem. 2002 Jan;80(1):178-90. **Cholesterol-dependent modulation of
dendrite outgrowth and microtubule stability in cultured neurons.** Fan QW, Yu
W, Gong JS, Zou K, Sawamura N, Senda T, Yanagisawa K, Michikawa M.  
Nutrition. 2003 Jun;19(6):531-5. **In vitro effects of selenite and mercuric
chloride on liver thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances and non-protein
thiols from rats: influences of dietary cholesterol and polyunsaturated and
saturated fatty acids.** Farina M, Soares FA, Feoli A, Roehring C, Brusque AM,
Rotta L, Perry ML, Souza DO, Rocha JB.  
Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 1999 Jan;30(1):23-8. **[Relationship between
oxysterols and atherosclerosis]** [Article in Chinese] Feng ZH, Cheng S.  
Exp Cell Res. 2004 Oct 15;300(1):109-20. **Cholesterol is essential for
mitosis progression and its deficiency induces polyploid cell formation.**
Fernandez C, Lobo Md Mdel V, Gomez-Coronado D, Lasuncion MA.  
Biochemistry. 1994 Apr 5;33(13):4065-71. **A role for cholesterol as a
structural effector of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.** Fernandez-
Ballester G, Castresana J, Fernandez AM, Arrondo JL, Ferragut JA, Gonzalez-Ros
JM.  
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Mar 1;89(5):1567-71. **Memory-enhancing effects
in male mice of pregnenolone and steroids metabolically derived from it.**
Flood JF, Morley JE, Roberts E.  
Lancet. 1989 Apr 22;1(8643):868-70. **Cholesterol as risk factor for mortality
in elderly women.** Forette B, Tortrat D, Wolmark Y.  
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 31;301(1):212-7. **The canine mast cell
activation via CRP.** Fujimoto T, Sato Y, Sasaki N, Teshima R, Hanaoka K,
Kitani S.  
J Neurooncol. 1999 Jan;41(2):175-80. **Serum cholesterol in cerebral
malignancies.** Grieb P, Ryba MS, Jagielski J, Gackowski W, Paczkowski P,
Chrapusta SJ.  
Atherosclerosis. 2001 Dec;159(2):425-32. **Effects of androgen manipulation on
postprandial triglyceridaemia, low-density lipoprotein particle size and
lipoprotein(a) in men.** Hislop MS, St Clair Gibson A, Lambert MI, Noakes TD,
Marais AD.  
JAMA, 2002;288:2569-2578. **Optimal Diets for Prevention of Coronary Heart
Disease** Hu FB; Willett WC.  
Obstet Gynecol. 1999 Apr;93(4):566-70. **Small low-density lipoprotein
particles in women with natural or surgically induced menopause.** Ikenoue N,
Wakatsuki A, Okatani Y.  
FEBS Lett. 2000 May 12;473(2):249-53. **Detection of lipofuscin-like
fluorophore in oxidized human low-density lipoprotein. 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal as
a potential source of fluorescent chromophore.** Itakura K, Oya-Ito T, Osawa
T, Yamada S, Toyokuni S, Shibata N, Kobayashi M, Uchida K.  
Indian J Exp Biol. 2001 Aug;39(8):793-7. **Selenium supplementation protects
from high fat diet-induced atherogenesis in rats: role of mitogen stimulated
lymphocytes and macrophage NO production.** Kang BP, Mehta U, Bansal MP.
"Similarly, NO levels with LPS+ and LPS- macrophages also found to be higher
in HFD fed group and decreased in group III. These studies reveal the
protective role of selenium in HFD-induced atherogenic process."  
Circulation. 1997 Nov 18;96(10):3300-7. **Body iron stores and the risk of
carotid atherosclerosis: prospective results from the Bruneck study.** Kiechl
S, Willeit J, Egger G, Poewe W, Oberhollenzer F.  
Metabolism. 2003 Jun;52(6):693-8. **Intake of trans fatty acids and low-
density lipoprotein size in a Costa Rican population.** Kim MK, Campos H.  
Z Ernahrungswiss. 1994 Jun;33(2):146-58. **The effects of dietary oils on the
fatty acid composition and osmotic fragility of rat erythrocytes.**
Kirchgessner M, Stangl GI, Reichlmayr-Lais AM, Eder K.  
Atherosclerosis. 1991 Jan;86(1):85-90. **Do antioxidants and polyunsaturated
fatty acids have a combined association with coronary atherosclerosis?** Kok
FJ, van Poppel G, Melse J, Verheul E, Schouten EG, Kruyssen DH, Hofman A. "...
**high PUFA levels, when insufficiently protected by antioxidants against
peroxidation, may indicate a higher risk of atherosclerosis.** "  
Vestn Akad Med Nauk SSSR. 1990;(6):44-7. **[Anti-inflammatory effects of
liposomes]** Kreines VM, Mel'nikova VM, Margolin IaM, Mel'iantseva LP,
Gladshtein AI, Andriasian BA.  
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 25;328(4):929-36. **Cholesterol-producing
transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans lives longer due to newly acquired enhanced
stress resistance.** Lee EY, Shim YH, Chitwood DJ, Hwang SB, Lee J, Paik YK.  
Eur Urol. 1993;23(4):490-501. **Influence of cholesterol derivatives on
cytoskeletal organization of human carcinoma cells.** Ludes B, Schmit AC,
Cremel G, Lambert AM, Hubert P, Jacqmin D, Bollack C, Staedel C.  
Am J Clin Nutr. 1997 Nov;66(5):1240-9. **Effect of cholesterol-rich diets with
and without added vitamins E and C on the severity of atherosclerosis in
rabbits.** Mahfouz MM, Kawano H, Kummerow FA.  
Am J Clin Nutr. 2003 Sep;78(3):370-5. **Effect of different forms of dietary
hydrogenated fats on LDL particle size.** Mauger JF, Lichtenstein AH, Ausman
LM, Jalbert SM, Jauhiainen M, Ehnholm C, Lamarche B.  
Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Clin Perform Programme. 2004;(9):69-75. **Mechanisms
of insulin-induced alterations in metabolism during critical illness.**
Mesotten D, Van den Berghe G.  
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jan;89(1):219-26. **Contribution of circulating
lipids to the improved outcome of critical illness by glycemic control with
intensive insulin therapy.** Mesotten D, Swinnen JV, Vanderhoydonc F, Wouters
PJ, Van den Berghe G.  
J Neurochem. 1999 Jun;72(6):2278-85. **Inhibition of cholesterol production
but not of nonsterol isoprenoid products induces neuronal cell death.**
Michikawa M, Yanagisawa K.  
BMC Immunology 2002, 3:13 **. Decreased inducibility of TNF expression in
lipid-loaded macrophages,** Ares MP, Stollenwerk M, Olsson A, Kallin B,
Jovinge S, Nilsson J.  
Am J Med. 2000 May;108(7):538-46. **Effects of lovastatin on cognitive
function and psychological well-being.** Muldoon MF, Barger SD, Ryan CM, Flory
JD, Lehoczky JP, Matthews KA, Manuck SB.  
Clin Biochem. 2004 Jan;37(1):22-6 **. Cholesterol bound to hemoglobin in
normal human erythrocytes: a new form of cholesterol in circulation?** Nikolic
M, Stanic D, Antonijevic N, Niketic V.  
Integr Physiol Behav Sci. 2000 Apr-Jun;35(2):120-31. **Blocking cholesterol
synthesis impairs acquisition of the classically conditioned eyeblink
response.** O'Brien WT, Xu G, Tint GS, Salen G, Servatius RJ.  
Free Radic Biol Med. 1995 Oct;19(4):511-6. **Cholesterol protects the
phospholipid bilayer from oxidative damage.** Parasassi T, Giusti AM, Raimondi
M, Ravagnan G, Sapora O, Gratton E.  
Clin Chim Acta. 1988 Dec 30;178(3):271-82. **Increase of erythrocyte
resistance to hemolysis and modification of membrane lipids induced by
hemodialysis.** Peuchant E, Salles C, Vallot C, Wone C, Jensen R.  
Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1992 Feb;113(2):136-8. **[Modification of radiation
sensitivity of lymphocytes of the rat thymus gland using cholesterol-enriched
autoliposomes]** Posokhov VS, Rozenberg OA, Khanson KP.  
J Clin Invest. 1993 Nov;92(5):2386-93. **Involvement of the tyrosinase gene in
the deposition of cardiac lipofuscin in mice. Association with aortic fatty
streak development.** Qiao JH, Welch CL, Xie PZ, Fishbein MC, Lusis AJ.  
Mol Nutr Food Res. 2005 Mar;49(3):274-84. **Coffee consumption and human
health - beneficial or detrimental? - Mechanisms for effects of coffee
consumption on different risk factors for cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes mellitus.** Ranheim T, Halvorsen B. [Coffee increases cholesterol in
blood, and is antioxidant.]  
Chem Phys Lipids. 2000 Apr;105(2):121-34. **Damage to liposomal lipids:
protection by antioxidants and cholesterol-mediated dehydration.** Samuni AM,
Lipman A, Barenholz Y.  
Behav Neurosci. 2003 Dec;117(6):1220-32. **Cholesterol modifies classical
conditioning of the rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) nictitating membrane
response.** Schreurs BG, Smith-Bell CA, Lochhead J, Sparks DL.  
J Nutr. 2002 Jul;132(7):1879-85. **A ketogenic diet favorably affects serum
biomarkers for cardiovascular disease in normal-weight men.** Sharman MJ,
Kraemer WJ, Love DM, Avery NG, Gomez AL, Scheett TP, Volek JS.  
J Nutr. 2004 Jul;134(7):1729-35. **Milk-derived fatty acids are associated
with a more favorable LDL particle size distribution in healthy men.** Sjogren
P, Rosell M, Skoglund-Andersson C, Zdravkovic S, Vessby B, de Faire U, Hamsten
A, Hellenius ML, Fisher RM.  
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):533-8. **Oxidized lipids in the
diet accelerate the development of fatty** **streaks in cholesterol-fed
rabbits.** Staprans I, Rapp JH, Pan XM, Hardman DA, Feingold KR.  
Arterioscler Thromb. 1994 Dec;14(12):1900-5. **Oxidized lipids in the diet are
a source of oxidized lipid in chylomicrons of human serum.** Staprans I, Rapp
JH, Pan XM, Kim KY, Feingold KR.  
Free Radic Biol Med. 2005 Mar 15;38(6):687-97. **The powerhouse takes control
of the cell: Is the mitochondrial permeability transition a viable therapeutic
target against neuronal dysfunction and death?** Stavrovskaya IG, Kristal BS.  
Am J Epidemiol. 1988 Dec;128(6):1276-88. **Heart disease mortality among
bridge and tunnel officers exposed to carbon monoxide.** Stern FB, Halperin
WE, Hornung RW, Ringenburg VL, McCammon CS.  
Biokhimiia. 1988 Sep;53(9):1449-54. **[Composition of DNA-bound lipids in the
regenerating rat liver]** Struchkov **** VA, Strazhevskaia NB.  
J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Jun;23(2):233-40. **Reduced low-density-
lipoprotein cholesterol causing low serum cholesterol levels in
gastrointestinal cancer: a case control study.** Tomiki Y, Suda S, Tanaka M,
Okuzawa A, Matsuda M, Ishibiki Y, Sakamoto K, Kamano T, Tsurumaru M, Watanabe
Y.  
Neurosci Res. 2000 Apr;36(4):261-73. **Novel brain function: biosynthesis and
actions of neurosteroids in neurons.** Tsutsui K, Ukena K, Usui M, Sakamoto H,
Takase M.  
J. Experimental Medicine 67:111, 1938. **The role of the thyroid in the
regulation of the cholesterol of rabbits.** Turner KB, Present CH, Didwell,
DH.  
Endocr J. 2005 Feb;52(1):89-94. **Subclinical Hypothyroidism may be Associated
with Elevated High-sensitive C-Reactive Protein (Low Grade Inflammation) and
Fasting Hyperinsulinemia.** Tuzcu A, Bahceci M, Gokalp D, Tuzun Y, Gunes K.  
Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter. 1988 Jul-Aug;(4):27-9. **[Effect of emotional-pain
stress on the level of lipids and esterification of cholesterol in the blood
of rats] [Article in Russian]** Tverdokhlib VP, Ozerova IN, Tvorogova MG,
Olfer'ev AM, Meerson FZ.  
Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1998 Feb;30(2):209-15 **. The decrease of liver LDL
receptor mRNA during fasting is related to the decrease in serum T3.** van der
Wal AM, Bakker O, Wiersinga WM.  
Lancet. 2005 Jan 1;365(9453):53-9. **Protection of hepatocyte mitochondrial
ultrastructure and function by strict blood glucose control with insulin in
critically ill patients.** Vanhorebeek I, De Vos R, Mesotten D, Wouters PJ, De
Wolf-Peeters C, Van den Berghe G.  
Gastroenterology. 1991 Aug;101(2):457-64. **Cell type-dependent effect of
phospholipid and cholesterol on bile salt cytotoxicity.** Velardi AL, Groen
AK, Elferink RP, van der Meer R, Palasciano G, Tytgat GN.  
J Lipid Res. 1998 Oct;39(10):1995-2004. **Dietary oxysterols are incorporated
in plasma triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, increase their susceptibility to
oxidation and increase aortic cholesterol concentration of rabbits.** Vine DF,
Mamo CL, Beilin LJ, Mori TA, Croft KD.  
Arkh Patol. 1971;33(6):51-5 **. [Changes in the arterial wall in rabbits
following their prolonged ingestion of native and oxidized fat (a non-
cholesterol model of arteriosclerosis)]** Voskresenskii ON, Vitt VV.  
Obstet Gynecol. 1998 Feb;91(2):234-40. **Estrogen-induced small low-density
lipoprotein particles in postmenopausal women.** Wakatsuki A, Ikenoue N,
Sagara Y.  
J Psychosom Res. 1995 Jul;39(5):549-62. **Cholesterol and psychological well-
being.** Wardle J.  
Metabolism. 1998 Jul;47(7):878-82. **Relationship between abnormal cholesterol
synthesis and retarded learning in rats.** Xu G, Servatius RJ, Shefer S, Tint
GS, O'Brien WT, Batta AK, Salen G.  
Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2002 Apr;10(2):129-31. **[Relationship between
plasma carbon monoxide and blood-brain barrier permeability in cirrhotic
rats]** [Article in Chinese] Yang S, Wang J, He B, Fang G, Fu R, Chen X.  
Am J Clin Nutr. 2004 Aug;80(2):291-8. **Serum cholesterol concentrations are
associated with visuomotor speed in men:** findings from the third National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994. Zhang J, Muldoon MF,
McKeown RE.  
Aging Clin Exp Res. 2004 Dec;16(6):472-5. **Combined measurement of serum
albumin and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol strongly predicts mortality
in frail older nursing-home residents.** Zuliani G, Volpatol S, Romagnoni F,
Soattin L, Bollini C, Leoci V, Fellin R

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2007. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  

