![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Protective CO2 and aging**  

The therapeutic effects of increasing carbon dioxide are being more widely
recognized in recent years. Even Jane Brody, the NY Times writer on health
topics, has favorably mentioned the use of the Buteyko method for asthma, and
the idea of permissive hypercapnia during mechanical ventilation, to prevent
lung damage from excess oxygen, has been discussed in medical journals. But
still very few biologists recognize its role as a fundamental, universal
protective factor. I think it will be helpful to consider some of the ways
carbon dioxide might be controlling situations that otherwise are poorly
understood.

The brain has a high rate of oxidative metabolism, and so it forms a very
large proportion of the carbon dioxide produced by an organism. It also
governs, to a great extent, the metabolism of other tissues, including their
consumption of oxygen and production of carbon dioxide or lactic acid. Within
a particular species, the rate of oxygen consumption increases in proportion
to brain size, rather than body weight. Between very different species, the
role of the brain in metabolism is even more obvious, since the resting
metabolic rate corresponds to the size of the brain. For example, a cat's
brain is about the size of a crocodile's, and their oxygen consumption at rest
is similar, despite their tremendous difference in body size.

Stress has to be understood as a process that develops in time, and the brain
(especially the neocortex and the frontal lobes) organizes the adaptive and
developmental processes in both the spatial and temporal dimensions. The
meaning of a situation influences the way the organism responds. For example,
the stress of being restrained for a long time can cause major
gastrointestinal bleeding and ulcerization, but if the animal has the
opportunity to bite something during the stress (signifying its ability to
fight back, and the possibility of escape) it can avoid the stress ulcers.

The patterning of the nervous activity throughout the body governs the local
ability to produce carbon dioxide. When the cortex of the brain is damaged or
removed, an animal becomes rigid, so the cortex is considered to have a tonic
inhibitory action on the body. But when the nerves are removed from a muscle
(for example, by disease or accident), the muscle goes into a state of
constant activity, and its ability to oxidize glucose and produce carbon
dioxide is reduced, while its oxidation of fatty acids persists, increasing
the production of toxic oxidative fragments of the fatty acids, which
contributes to the muscle's atrophy.

The organism's intentions, expectations, or plans, are represented in the
nervous system as a greater readiness for action, and in the organs and
tissues controlled by the nerves, as an increase or decrease of oxidative
efficiency, analogous to the differences between innervated and denervated
muscles. This pattern in the nervous system has been called the acceptor of
action, because it is continually being compared with the actual situation,
and being refined as the situation is evaluated. The state of the organism,
under the influence of a particular acceptor of action, is called a
functional system, including all the components of the organism that
participate most directly in realizing the intended adaptive action.

The actions of nerves can be considered anabolic, because during a stressful
situation in which the catabolic hormones of adaption, e.g., cortisol,
increase, the tissues of the functional system are protected, and while idle
tissues may undergo autophagy or other form of involution, the needs of the
active tissues are supplied with nutrients from their breakdown, allowing them
to change and, when necessary, grow in size or complexity.

The brain's role in protecting against injury by stress, when it sees a course
of action, has a parallel in the differences between concentric (positive,
muscle shortening) and eccentric (negative, lengthening under tension)
exercise, and also with the differences between innervated and denervated
muscles. In eccentric exercise and denervation, less oxygen is used and less
carbon dioxide is produced, while lactic acid increases, displacing carbon
dioxide, and more fat is oxidized. Prolonged stress similarly decreases carbon
dioxide and increases lactate, while increasing the use of fat.

Darkness is stressful and catabolic. For example, in aging people, the morning
urine contains nearly all of the calcium lost during the 24 hour period, and
mitochondria are especially sensitive to the destructive effects of darkness.
Sleep reduces the destructive catabolic effects of darkness. During the rapid-
eye-movement (dreaming) phase of sleep, breathing is inhibited, and the level
of carbon dioxide in the tissues accumulates. In restful sleep, the oxygen
tension is frequently low enough, and the carbon dioxide tension high enough,
to trigger the multiplication of stem cells and mitochondria.

Dreams represent the acceptor of action operating independently of the
sensory information that it normally interacts with. During dreams, the brain
(using a system called the Ascending Reticular Activating System) disconnects
itself from the sensory systems. I think this is the nervous equivalent of
concentric/positive muscle activity, in the sense that the brain is in control
of its actions. The active, dreaming phase of sleep occurs more frequently in
the later part of the night, as morning approaches. This is the more stressful
part of the night, with cortisol and some other stress hormones reaching a
peak at dawn, so it would be reasonable for the brain's defensive processes to
be most active at that time. The dreaming process in the brain is associated
with deep muscle relaxation, which is probably associated with the trophic
(restorative) actions of the nerves.

In ancient China the Taoists were concerned with longevity, and according to
Joseph Needham ( _Science and Civilization in China_ ) their methods included
the use of herbs, minerals, and steroids extracted from the urine of children.
Some of those who claimed extreme longevity practiced controlled breathing and
tai chi (involving imagery, movement, and breating), typically in the early
morning hours, when stress reduction is most important. As far as I know,
there are no studies of carbon dioxide levels in practitioners of tai chi, but
the sensation of warmth they typically report suggests that it involves
hypoventilation.

In the 1960s, a Russian researcher examined hospital records of measurements
of newborn babies, and found that for several decades the size of their heads
had been increasing. He suggested that it might be the result of increasing
atmospheric carbon dioxide.

The experiences and nutrition of a pregnant animal are known to affect the
expression of genes in the offspring, affecting such things as allergies,
metabolic rate, brain size, and intelligence. Miles Storfer (1999) has
reviewed the evidence for epigenetic environmental control of brain size and
intelligence. The main mechanisms of epigenetic effects or imprinting are
now known to involve methylation and acetylation of the chromosomes (DNA and
histones).

Certain kinds of behavior, as well as nutrition and other environmental
factors, increase the production and retention of carbon dioxide. The normal
intrauterine level of carbon dioxide is high, and it can be increased or
decreased by changes in the mother's physiology. The effects of carbon dioxide
on many biological processes involving methylation and acetylation of the
genetic material suggest that the concentration of carbon dioxide during
gestation might regulate the degree to which parental imprinting will persist
in the developing fetus. There is some evidence of increased demethylation
associated with the low level of oxygen in the uterus (Wellman, et al., 2008).
A high metabolic rate and production of carbon dioxide would increase the
adaptability of the new organism, by decreasing the limiting genetic imprints.

A quick reduction of carbon dioxide caused by hyperventilation can provoke an
epileptic seizure, and can increase muscle spasms and vascular leakiness, and
(by releasing serotonin and histamine) contribute to inflammation and clotting
disorders. On a slightly longer time scale, a reduction of carbon dioxide can
increase the production of lactic acid, which is a promoter of inflammation
and fibrosis. A prolonged decrease in carbon dioxide can increase the
susceptibility of proteins to glycation (the addition of aldehydes, from
polyunsaturated fat peroxidation or methylglyoxal from lactate metabolism, to
amino groups), and a similar process is likely to contribute to the
methylation of histones, a process that increases with aging. Histones
regulate genetic activity.

With aging, DNA methylation is increased (Bork, et al., 2009). **I suggest
that methylation stabilizes and protects cells when growth and regeneration
aren't possible (and that it's likely to increase when CO2 isn't available).**
Hibernation (Morin and Storey, 2009) and sporulation (Ruiz-Herrera, 1994;
Clancy, et al., 2002) appear to use methylation protectively.

Parental stress, prenatal stress, early life stress, and even stress in
adulthood contribute to imprinting of the genes, partly through methylation
of DNA and the histones.

Methionine and choline are the main dietary sources of methyl donors.
Restriction of methionine has many protective effects, including increased
average (42%) and maximum (44%) longevity in rats (Richie, et al., 1994).
Restriction of methyl donors causes demethylation of DNA (Epner, 2001). ****
The age accelerating effect of methionine might be related to disturbing the
methylation balance, inappropriately suppressing cellular activity. Besides
its effect on the methyl pool, methionine inhibits thyroid function and
damages mitochondria.

The local concentration of carbon dioxide in specific tissues and organs can
be adjusted by nervous and hormonal activation or inhibition of the carbonic
anhydrase enzymes, that accelerate the oonversion of CO2 to carbonic acid,
H2CO3. The activity of carbonic anhydrase can determine the density and
strength of the skeleton, the excitability of nerves, the accumulation of
water, and can regulate the structure and function of the tissues and organs.

Ordinarily, carbon dioxide and bicarbonate are thought of only in relation to
the regulation of pH, and only in a very general way. Because of the
importance of keeping the pH of the blood within a narrow range, carbon
dioxide is commonly thought of as a toxin, because an excess can cause
unconsciousness and acidosis. But increasing carbon dioxide doesn't
necessarily cause acidosis, and acidosis caused by carbon dioxide isn't as
harmful as lactic acidosis.

Frogs and toads, being amphibians, are especially dependent on water, and in
deserts or areas with a dry season they can survive a prolonged dry period by
burrowing into mud or sand. Since they may be buried 10 or 11 inches below the
surface, they are rarely found, and so haven't been extensively studied. In
species that live in the California desert, they have been known to survive 5
years of burial without rainfall, despite a moderately warm average
temperature of their surroundings. One of their known adaptations is to
produce a high level of urea, allowing them to osmotically absorb and retain
water. (Very old people sometimes have extremely high urea and osmotic
tension.)

Some laboratory studies show that as a toad burrows into mud, the amount of
carbon dioxide in its tissues increases. Their skin normally functions like a
lung, exchanging oxygen for carbon dioxide. If the toad's nostrils are at the
surface of the mud, as dormancy begins its breathing will gradually slow,
increasing the carbon dioxide even more. Despite the increasing carbon
dioxide, the pH is kept stable by an increase of bicarbonate (Boutilier, et
al., 1979). A similar increase of bicarbonate has been observed in hibernating
hamsters and doormice.

Thinking about the long dormancy of frogs reminded me of a newspaper story I
read in the 1950s. Workers breaking up an old concrete structure found a
dormant toad enclosed in the concrete, and it revived soon after being
released. The concrete had been poured decades earlier.

Although systematic study of frogs or toads during their natural buried
estivation has been very limited, there have been many reports of accidental
discoveries that suggest that the dormant state might be extended indefinitely
if conditions are favorable. Carbon dioxide has antioxidant effects, and many
other stabilizing actions, including protection against hypoxia and the
excitatory effects of intracellular calcium and inflammation (Baev, et al.,
1978, 1995; Bari, et al., 1996; Brzecka, 2007; Kogan, et al., 1994; Malyshev,
et al., 1995).

When mitochondria are uncoupled, they produce more carbon dioxide than
normal, and the mitochondria produce fewer free radicals. Animals with
uncoupled mitochondria live longer than animals with the ordinary, more
efficient mitochondria, that produce more reactive oxidative fragments. One
effect of the high rate of oxidation of the uncoupled mitochondria is that
they can eliminate polyunsatured fatty acids that might otherwise be
integrated into tissue structures, or function as inappropriate regulatory
signals.

Birds have a higher metabolic rate than mammals of the same size, and live
longer. Their tissues contain fewer of the highly unsaturated fatty acids.
Queen bees, which live many times longer than worker bees, have mainly
monounsaturated fats in their tissues, while the tissues of the short-lived
worker bees, receiving a different diet, within a couple of weeks of hatching
will contain highly unsaturated fats.

Bats have a very high metabolic rate, and an extremely long lifespan for an
animal of their size. While most animals of their small size live only a few
years, many bats live a few decades. Bat caves usually have slightly more
carbon dioxide than the outside atmosphere, but they usually contain a large
amount of ammonia, and bats maintain a high serum level of carbon dioxide,
which protects them from the otherwise toxic effects of the ammonia.

The naked mole rat, another small animal with an extremely long lifespan (in
captivity they have lived up to 30 years, 9 or 10 times longer than mice of
the same size) has a low basal metabolic rate, but I think measurements made
in laboratories might not represent their metabolic rate in their natural
habitat. They live in burrows that are kept closed, so the percentage of
oxygen is lower than in the outside air, and the percentage of carbon dioxide
ranges from 0.2% to 5% (atmospheric CO2 is about 0.038). The temperature and
humidity in their burrows can be extremely high, and to be very meaningful
their metabolic rate would have to be measured when their body temperature is
raised by the heat in the burrow.

When they have been studied in Europe and the US, there has been no
investigation of the effect of altitude on their metabolism, and these animals
are native to the high plains of Kenya and Ethiopia, where the low atmospheric
pressure would be likely to increase the level of carbon dioxide in their
tissues. Consequently, I doubt that the longevity seen in laboratory
situations accurately reflects the longevity of the animals in their normal
habitat.

Besides living in a closed space with a high carbon dioxide content, mole rats
have another similarity to bees. In each colony, there is only one female that
reproduces, the queen, and, like a queen bee, she is the largest individual in
the colony. In beehives, the workers carefully regulate the carbon dioxide
concentration, which varies from about 0.2% to 6%, similar to that of the mole
rat colony. A high carbon dioxide content activates the ovaries of a queen
bee, increasing her fertility.

Since queen bees and mole rats live in the dark, I think their high carbon
dioxide compensates for the lack of light. (Both light and CO2 help to
maintain oxidative metabolism and inhibit lactic acid formation.) Mole rats
are believed to sleep very little. During the night, normal people tolerate
more CO2, and so breathe less, especially near morning, with increased active
dreaming sleep.

A mole rat has never been known to develop cancer. Their serum C-reactive
protein is extremely low, indicating that they are resistant to inflammation.
In humans and other animals that are susceptible to cancer, one of the genes
that is likely to be silenced by stress, aging, and methylation is p53, a
tumor-suppressor gene.

If the intrauterine experience, with low oxygen and high carbon dioxide,
serves to reprogram cells to remove the accumulated effects of age and
stress, and so to maximize the developmental potential of the new organism, a
life that's lived with nearly those levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide might
be able to avoid the progressive silencing of genes and loss of function that
cause aging and degenerative diseases.

Several diseases and syndromes are now thought to involve abnormal methylation
of genes. Prader-Willi sydrome, Angelman's syndrome, and various autistic
spectrum disorders, as well as post-traumatic stress disorder and several
kinds of cancer seem to involve excess methylation.

Moderate methionine restriction (for example, using gelatin regularly in the
diet) might be practical, but if increased carbon dioxide can activate the
demethylase enzymes in a controlled way, it might be a useful treatment for
the degenerative diseases and for aging itself.

The low carbon dioxide production of hypothyroidism (e.g., Lee and Levine,
1999), and the respiratory alkalosis of estrogen excess, are often overlooked.
An adequate supply of calcium, and sometimes supplementation of salt and
baking soda, can increase the tissue content of CO2.

REFERENCES

Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Apr;296(4):E621-7. **Uncoupling protein-2
regulates lifespan in mice.** Andrews ZB, Horvath TL.

Fiziol Zh SSSR 1978 Oct;64(10):1456-62. **[Role of CO2 fixation in increasing
the body's resistance to acute hypoxia].** Baev VI, Vasil'ev VV, Nikolaeva EN.
In rats, the phenomenon of considerable increase in resistance to acute
hypoxia observed after 2-hour stay under conditions of gradually increasing
concentration of CO2, decreasing concentration of O2, and external cooling at
2--3 degrees seems to be based mainly on changes in concentration of CO2
(ACCORDINGLY, PCO2 and other forms of CO2 in the blood). The high resistance
to acute hypoxia develops as well after subcutaneous or i.v. administration of
1.0 ml of water solution (169.2 mg/200 g) NaHCO2, (NH4)2SO4, MgSO4, MnSO4, and
ZnSO4 (in proportion: 35 : 5 : 2 : 0.15 : 0.15, resp.) or after 1-hour effect
of increased hypercapnia and hypoxia without cooling.

Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova 1995 Feb;81(2):47-52. **[The unknown physiological
role of carbon dioxide].** Baev VI, Vasil'eva IV, L'vov SN, Shugalei IV [The
data suggests that carbon dioxide is a natural element of the organism
antioxidant defence system. ion poisoning].

Stroke. 1996 Sep;27(9):1634-9; discussion 1639-40. **Differential effects of
short-term hypoxia and hypercapnia on N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced cerebral
vasodilatation in piglets.** Bari F, Errico RA, Louis TM, Busija DW.

Vojnosanit Pregl. 1996 Jul-Aug;53(4):261-74. **[Carbon dioxide inhibits the
generation of active forms of oxygen in human and animal cells and the
significance of the phenomenon in biology and medicine]** [Article in Serbian]
Boljevic S, Kogan AH, Gracev SV, Jelisejeva SV, Daniljak IG.

J Exp Biol. 1979 Oct;82:357-65. **Acid-base relationships in the blood of the
toad, Bufo marinus. III. The effects of burrowing.** Boutilier RG, Randall DJ,
Shelton G, Toews DP.

Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2007;67(2):197-206. **Role of hypercapnia in brain
oxygenation in sleep-disordered breathing.** Brzecka A. Adaptive mechanisms
may diminish the detrimental effects of recurrent nocturnal hypoxia in
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). The potential role of elevated carbon dioxide
(CO2) in improving brain oxygenation in the patients with severe OSA syndrome
is discussed. CO2 increases oxygen uptake by its influence on the regulation
of alveolar ventilation and ventilation-perfusion matching, facilitates oxygen
delivery to the tissues by changing the affinity of oxygen to hemoglobin, and
increases cerebral blood flow by effects on arterial blood pressure and on
cerebral vessels. Recent clinical studies show improved brain oxygenation when
hypoxia is combined with hypercapnia. Anti-inflammatory and protective against
organ injury properties of CO2 may also have therapeutic importance. These
biological effects of hypercapnia may improve brain oxygenation under hypoxic
conditions. This may be especially important in patients with severe OSA
syndrome.

Ageing Res Rev. 2009 Oct;8(4):268-76. Epub 2009 Apr 1. **The role of
epigenetics in aging and age-related diseases.** Calvanese V, Lara E, Kahn A,
Fraga MF.

Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol. 2009 Jul-Aug;44(4):194-9. Epub 2009 Jul 3. **[Effect
of restricting amino acids except methionine on mitochondrial oxidative
stress.]** [Article in Spanish] Caro P, Gómez J, Sánchez I, López-Torres M,
Barja G.

Cell Metab. 2007 Jan;5(1):21-33. **A central thermogenic-like mechanism in
feeding regulation: an interplay between arcuate nucleus T3 and UCP2.**
Coppola A, Liu ZW, Andrews ZB, Paradis E, Roy MC, Friedman JM, Ricquier D,
Richard D, Horvath TL, Gao XB, Diano S.

Ter Arkh. 1995;67(3):23-6. **[Changes in the sensitivity of leukocytes to the
inhibiting effect of CO2 on their generation of active forms of oxygen in
bronchial asthma patients]** Daniliak IG, Kogan AKh, Sumarokov AV, Bolevich S.

Cell Metab. 2007 Dec;6(6):497-505. **Respiratory uncoupling in skeletal muscle
delays death and diminishes age-related disease.** Gates AC, Bernal-Mizrachi
C, Chinault SL, Feng C, Schneider JG, Coleman T, Malone JP, Townsend RR,
Chakravarthy MV, Semenkovich CF.

Endocr Pract. 2009 Jun 2:1-13. **Fibrotic Appearance of Lungs in Severe
Hypothyroidism is Reversible with Thyroxine Replacement.** George JT, Thow JC,
Rodger KA, Mannion R, Jayagopal V.

J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2009 Jun;41(3):309-21. Epub 2009 Jul 25. **Effect of
methionine dietary supplementation on mitochondrial oxygen radical generation
and oxidative DNA damage in rat liver and heart.** Gomez J, Caro P, Sanchez I,
Naudi A, Jove M, Portero-Otin M, Lopez-Torres M, Pamplona R, Barja G.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jul 23;93(15):7612-7. **Increased tricarboxylic
acid cycle flux in rat brain during forepaw stimulation detected with
1H[13C]NMR.** Hyder F, Chase JR, Behar KL, Mason GF, Siddeek M, Rothman DL,
Shulman RG.

Can J Neurol Sci. 1979 May;6(2):105-12. **The effects of partial chronic
denervation on forearm metabolism.** Karpati G, Klassen G, Tanser P.

Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1994 Oct;118(10):395-8. **[CO2--a natural inhibitor of
active oxygen form generation by phagocytes]** Kogan AKh, Manuilov BM, Grachev
SV, Bolevich S, Tsypin AB, Daniliak IG.

Izv Akad Nauk Ser Biol. 1997 Mar-Apr;(2):204-17. **[Carbon dioxide--a
universal inhibitor of the generation of active oxygen forms by cells
(deciphering one enigma of evolution)]** Kogan AKh, Grachev SV, Eliseeva SV,
Bolevich S.

Vopr Med Khim. 1996 Jul-Sep;42(3):193-202. **[Ability of carbon dioxide to
inhibit generation of superoxide anion radical in cells and its biomedical
role]** Kogan AKh, Grachev SV, Eliseeva SV, Bolevich S.

Dokl Akad Nauk. 1996 May;348(3):413-6. **[New evidence for the inhibitory
action of CO2 on generation of superoxide anion radicals by phagocytes in
various tissues. (Mechanism of bio- and eco-effects of CO2)]** Kogan AKh,
Grachev SV, Bolevich S, Eliseeva SV.

Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1996 Apr;121(4):407-10. **[Carbon dioxide gas inhibition
of active forms of oxygen generation by cells in the internal organs and its
biological significance]** Kogan AKh, Grachev SV, Eliseeva SV.

Fiziol Cheloveka. 1995 Jul-Aug;21(4):128-36. **[CO2--a natural inhibitor of
the generation of active species of oxygen in phagocytes]** Kogan AKh,
Manuilov BM, Grachev SV, Bolevich S, Tsypin AB, Daniliak IG.

**Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter. 1995 Jul-Sep;(3):34-40. [Comparative study of the
effect of carbon dioxide on the generation of active forms of oxygen by
leukocytes in health and in bronchial asthma]** Kogan AKh, Bolevich S,
Daniliak IG.

Can J Anaesth. 1999 Feb;46(2):185-9. **Acute respiratory alkalosis associated
with low minute ventilation in a patient with severe hypothyroidism.** Lee HT,
Levine M. [Tl128@columbia.edu](mailto:Tl128@columbia.edu) PURPOSE: Patients
with severe hypothyroidism present unique challenges to anesthesiologists and
demonstrate much increased perioperative risks. Overall, they display
increased sensitivity to anesthetics, higher incidence of perioperative
cardiovascular morbidity, increased risks for postoperative ventilatory
failure and other physiological derangements. The previously described
physiological basis for the increased incidence of postoperative ventilatory
failure in hypothyroid patients includes decreased central and peripheral
ventilatory responses to hypercarbia and hypoxia, muscle weakness, depressed
central respiratory drive, and resultant alveolar hypoventilation. These
ventilatory failures are associated most frequently with severe hypoxia and
carbon dioxide (CO2) retention. The purpose of this clinical report is to
discuss an interesting and unique anesthetic presentation of a patient with
severe hypothyroidism. CLINICAL FEATURES: We describe an unique presentation
of ventilatory failure in a 58 yr old man with severe hypothyroidism. He had
exceedingly low perioperative respiratory rate (3-4 bpm) and minute
ventilation volume, and at the same time developed primary acute respiratory
alkalosis and associated hypocarbia (P(ET)CO2 approximately 320-22 mmHg).
CONCLUSION: Our patient's ventilatory failure was based on unacceptably low
minute ventilation and respiratory rate that was unable to sustain adequate
oxygenation. His profoundly lowered basal metabolic rate and decreased CO2
production, resulting probably from severe hypothyroidism, may have resulted
in development of acute respiratory alkalosis in spite of concurrently
diminished minute ventilation.

Anal Bioanal Chem. 2008 Jan;390(2):679-88. Epub 2007 Oct 27. **The structural
modification of DNA nucleosides by nonenzymatic glycation: an in vitro study
based on the reactions of glyoxal and methylglyoxal with 2'-deoxyguanosine.**
Li Y, Cohenford MA, Dutta U, Dain JA.

Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1995 Jun;119(6):590-3. **[Adaptation to high altitude
hypoxia facilitates a limitation of lipid peroxidation activation in
inflammation and stress] [Article in Russian]** Malyshev VV, Vasil'eva LS,
Belogorov SB, Nefedova TV.

Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007 Sep;293(3):R1159-68. Epub 2007
Jun 20. **Denervation-induced skeletal muscle atrophy is associated with
increased mitochondrial ROS production.** Muller FL, Song W, Jang YC, Liu Y,
Sabia M, Richardson A, Van Remmen H.

Radiobiologiia. 1984 Jan-Feb;24(1):29-34. **[Enzyme activity of glutamic acid
metabolism and the Krebs cycle in the brain of rats laser-irradiated against a
background of altered adrenoreceptor function] [Article in Russian]** Pikulev
AT, Dzhugurian NA, Zyrianova TN, Lavrova VM, Mostovnikov VA.

Rejuvenation Res.2007 Dec12; :18072884, **Exploring Overlooked Natural
Mitochondria-Rejuvenative Intervention: The Puzzle of Bowhead Whales and Naked
Mole Rats.** Prokopov A.F.

Proceedings of the Japan Academy. Ser. B: Physical and Biological Sciences
Vol.78, No.10(2002)pp.293-298. **DNA methylation and Lamarckian inheritance,**
Sano H.

Biol Chem. 2009 Nov;390(11):1145-53. **The epigenetic bottleneck of
neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases.** Sananbenesi F, Fischer A. The
orchestrated expression of genes is essential for the development and survival
of every organism. In addition to the role of transcription factors, the
availability of genes for transcription is controlled by a series of proteins
that regulate epigenetic chromatin remodeling. The two most studied epigenetic
phenomena are DNA methylation and histone-tail modifications. Although a large
body of literature implicates the deregulation of histone acetylation and DNA
methylation with the pathogenesis of cancer, recently epigenetic mechanisms
have also gained much attention in the neuroscientific community. In fact, a
new field of research is rapidly emerging and there is now accumulating
evidence that the molecular machinery that regulates histone acetylation and
DNA methylation is intimately involved in synaptic plasticity and is essential
for learning and memory. Importantly, dysfunction of epigenetic gene
expression in the brain might be involved in neurodegenerative and psychiatric
diseases. In particular, it was found that inhibition of histone deacetylases
attenuates synaptic and neuronal loss in animal models for various
neurodegenerative diseases and improves cognitive function. In this article,
we will summarize recent data in the novel field of neuroepigenetics and
discuss the question why epigenetic strategies are suitable therapeutic
approaches for the treatment of brain diseases.

Ukr Biokhim Zh 1994 Jan-Feb;66(1):109-12. **[Protective effect of sodium
bicarbonate in nitrite ion poisoning].** Shugalei IV, L'vov SN, Baev VI,
Tselinskii IV

Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000 Mar;161(3 Pt 1):891-8. **Modulation of release
of reactive oxygen species by the contracting diaphragm.** Stofan DA, Callahan
LA, DiMarco AF, Nethery DE, Supinski GS.

Ecology: Vol. 50, No. 3, pp. 492-494. **Carbon Dioxide Retention: A Mechanism
of Ammonia Tolerance in Mammals.** Studier EM and Fresquez AA.

Sci Signal. 2009 Mar 31;2(64): pe17. **Reversing DNA methylation: new insights
from neuronal activity-induced Gadd45b in adult neurogenesis.** Wu H, Sun YE.
Neurogenesis in the adult mammalian brain involves activity-dependent
expression of genes critical for the proliferation of progenitors and for
neuronal maturation. A recent study suggests that the stress response gene
Gadd45b (growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible protein 45 beta) can be
transiently induced by neuronal activity and may promote adult neurogenesis
through dynamic DNA demethylation of specific gene promoters in adult
hippocampus. These results provide evidence supporting the provocative ideas
that active DNA demethylation may occur in postmitotic neurons and that DNA
methylation-mediated dynamic epigenetic regulation is involved in regulating
long-lasting changes in neural plasticity in mammalian brains.

Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter. 2005 Apr-Jun;(2):13-5. **[The effect of the NMDA-
receptor blocker MK-801 on sensitivity of the respiratory system to carbon
dioxide]** Tarakanov IA, Dymetska A, Tarasova NN.

Life Sci. 1997;61(5):523-35. **Effect of acidotic challenges on local
depolarizations evoked by N-methyl-D-aspartate in the rat striatum.** Urenjak
J, Zilkha E, Gotoh M, Obrenovitch TP. Hypercapnia reduced NMDA-evoked
responses in a concentration-dependent manner, with 7.5 and 15 % CO2 in the
breathing mixture reducing the depolarization amplitude to 74 % and 64 % of
that of the initial stimuli, respectively. Application of 50 mM NH4+
progressively reduced dialysate pH, and a further acidification was observed
when NH4+ was discontinued. Perfusion of NMDA after NH4+ application evoked
smaller depolarizations (56 % of the corresponding control, 5 min after NH4+
removal), and this effect persisted for over 1 h. Together, these results
demonstrate that extracellular acidosis, such as that associated with
excessive neuronal activation or ischemia, inhibits NMDA-evoked responses in
vivo.

Arch Int Physiol Biochim. 1977 Apr;85(2):295-304. **Glutamate and glutamine in
the brain of the neonatal rat during hypercapnia.** Van Leuven F, Weyne J,
Leusen I.

**Pediatrics 1995 Jun;95(6):868-874. Carbon dioxide protects the perinatal
brain from hypoxic-ischemic damage: an experimental study in the immature
rat.** Vannucci RC, Towfighi J, Heitjan DF, Brucklacher RM

Pediatr Res 1997 Jul;42(1):24-29. **Effect of carbon dioxide on cerebral
metabolism during hypoxia-ischemia in the immature rat.** Vannucci RC,
Brucklacher RM, Vannucci SJ

Sci. Signal., 31 March 2009 Vol. 2, Issue 64, p. pe17, **Reversing DNA
Methylation: New Insights from Neuronal Activity-Induced Gadd45b in Adult
Neurogenesis** Wu H, Sun YI

Copyright 2011. Raymond Peat, P.O. Box 5764, Eugene OR 97405. All Rights
Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
Not for republication without written permission.  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

