A R T I C L E Progesterone, not estrogen, is the coronary protection factor of
women. In the 1940s, around the time that Hans Selye was reporting that
estrogen causes shock, and that progesterone protects against many stress-
related problems, the anthropologist Ashley Montague published The Natural
Superiority of Women. Later, as I looked at the history of endocrine research,
it seemed apparent that progesterone was responsible for many of the
biological advantages of females, such as a longer average life-span, while
testosterone was responsible for men’s advantage in muscular strength.
Although evidence of estrogen’s toxicity had been accumulating for decades,
pharmaceutical promotion was finding hundreds of things to treat with
estrogen, which they called “the female hormone.” By the 1940s, it was known
to produce excessive blood clotting, miscarriage, cancer, age-like changes in
connective tissue, premenstrual syndrome, varicose veins, orthostatic
hypotension, etc., but, as Mark Twain said, a lie can run around the world
before the truth gets its boots on. After the DES fiasco, in which “the female
hormone” which had been sold to prevent miscarriages was proven to cause them,
the estrogen industry decided to offer men the protection against heart
attacks that women supposedly got from their estrogen. The men who received
estrogen in the study had an increased incidence of heart attacks, so that
campaign was postponed for about 30 years. The Shutes used vitamin E to treat
the excessive blood clotting caused by estrogen, and vitamin E was considered
to be an estrogen antagonist. Estrogen affected the liver’s production of
clot-regulating proteins, and it also relaxed large veins, allowing blood
pooling that slowed the blood sufficiently to give it time to form clots
before returning to the lungs. Early in the century, unsaturated fats were
found to inactivate the proteolytic enzymes that dissolve clots, and vitamin E
was known, by the 1940s, to provide protection against the toxicity of the
unsaturated fats. The toxic synergy of estrogen and unsaturated fats had
already been recognized. But in the 1950s, the seed oil industry, ignoring the
toxic, carcinogenic effects of the unsaturated oils, began intensified
promotion of their products as beneficial foods. (Decades earlier, Mark Twain
had reported on the plans of the cottonseed industry to make people eat their
by-product instead of butter.) While estrogen was being offered as the hormone
that protects against heart attacks, the liquid vegetable oils were being
advertised as the food that would prevent heart attacks. Just a few years
after the estrogen industry suffered the setbacks of the DES and heart attack
publicity, the oil industry cancelled some tests of the “heart protective
diet,” because it was causing both more heart attacks and more cancer deaths.
Somehow, these two fetid streams converged: Estrogen, like the unsaturated
oils, lowered the amount of cholesterol in the blood, and an excess of blood
cholesterol was said to cause heart attacks. (And, more recently, the
estrogenic effects of the seed oils are claimed to offer protection against
cancer.) The ability to lower the cholesterol “risk factor” for heart attacks
became a cultural icon, so that the contribution of estrogen and unsaturated
oils to the pathologies of clotting could be ignored. Likewise, the
contribution of unsaturated fats’ lipid peroxidation to the development of
atherosclerotic plaques was simply ignored. But one of estrogen’s long
established toxic effects, the reduction of tone in veins, was turned into
something like a “negative risk factor”: The relaxation of blood vessels would
prevent high blood pressure and its consequences, in this new upside down
paradigm. This vein-dilating effect of estrogen has been seen to play a role
in the development of varicose veins, in orthostatic hypotension, and in the
formation of blood clots in the slow-moving blood in the large leg veins. When
it was discovered that the endothelial relaxing factor was nitric oxide, a new
drug business came into being. Nitroglycerine had been in use for decades to
open blood vessels, and, ignoring the role of nitrite vasodilators in the
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, new drugs were developed to increase the
production of nitric oxide. The estrogen industry began directing research
toward the idea that estrogen works through nitric oxide to “improve” the
function of blood vessels and the heart. (Besides the argument based on “risk
factors,” many people cite the published observations that “women who take
estrogen are healthier” than women who don’t use it. But studies show that
their “control groups” consisted of women who weren’t as healthy to begin
with.) In the 1970s, after reading Szent-Gyorgyi’s description of the
antagonistic effect of progesterone and estrogen on the heart, I reviewed the
studies that showed that progesterone protects against estrogen’s clotting
effect. I experimented with progesterone, showing that it increases the muscle
tone in the walls of veins, which is very closely related to the effects
Szent-Gyorgyi described in the heart. And progesterone opposes estrogen’s
ability to increase the amount of free fatty acids circulating in the blood.
More recently, it has been discovered that progesterone inhibits the
expression of the enzyme nitric oxide synthase, while estrogen stimulates its
expression. At the time of ovulation, when estrogen is high, a woman breathes
out 50% more nitric oxide (“NO”) than men do, but at other times, under the
influence of increased progesterone and thyroid, and reduced estrogen, women
exhale much less NO than men do. (Nitric oxide is a free radical, and it
decomposes into other toxic compounds, including the free radical
peroxynitrile, which damages cells, including the blood vessels. brain, and
heart. Carbon dioxide tends to inhibit the production of peroxynitrile.) If
nitric oxide produced under the influence of estrogen were important in
preventing cardiovascular disease, then men’s larger production of nitric
oxide would give them greater protection than women have. From more realistic
perspectives, nitric oxide is being considered as a cause of aging, especially
brain aging. Nitric oxide interacts with unsaturated fats to reduce oxygen
use, damage mitochondria, and cause edema. I think we can begin to see that
the various “heart protective” ideas that have been promoted to the public for
fifty years are coming to a dead end, and that a new look at the fundamental
problems involved in heart disease would be appropriate. Basic principles that
make heart disease more understandable will also be useful for understanding
shock, edema, panic attacks, high altitude sickness, high blood pressure,
kidney disease, some lung diseases, MS, multiple organ failure, and
excitotoxicity or “programmed” cell death of the sort that causes degenerative
nerve diseases and deterioration of other tissues. The research supporting
this view is remarkably clear, but it isn’t generally known because of the
powerful propaganda coming from the drug and oil industries and their public
servants. Broda Barnes was right when he said that the “riddle of heart
attacks” was solved when he demonstrated that hypothyroidism caused heart
attacks, and that they were prevented by correcting hypothyroidism. He also
observed that correcting hypothyroidism prevented the degenerative conditions
(including heart disease) that so often occur in diabetics. Since
hypothyroidism and diabetes are far more frequent in women, who have fewer
heart attacks than men, it is appropriate to wonder why women tolerate
hypothyroidism better than men. In hypothyroidism and diabetes, respiration is
impaired, and lactic acid is formed even at rest, and relatively little carbon
dioxide is produced. To compensate for the metabolic inefficiency of
hypothyroidism, adrenalin and noradrenalin are secreted in very large amounts.
Adrenalin causes free fatty acids to circulate at much higher levels, and the
lactic acid, adrenalin, and free fatty acids all stimulate hyperventilation.
The already deficient carbon dioxide is reduced even more, producing
respiratory alkalosis. Free fatty acids, especially unsaturated fats, increase
permeability of blood vessels, allowing proteins and fats to enter the
endothelium and smooth muscle cells of the blood vessels. Lactic acid itself
promotes an inflammatory state, and in combination with reduced CO2 and
respiratory alkalosis, contributes to the hyponatremia (sodium deficiency)
that is characteristic of hypothyroidism. This sodium deficiency and osmotic
dilution causes cells to take up water, increasing their volume. In
hyperventilation, the heart’s ability to work is decreased, and the work it
has to do is increased, because peripheral resistance is increased, raising
blood pressure. One component of peripheral resistance is the narrowing of the
channels in blood vessels caused by endothelial swelling. In the heart, a
similarly waterlogged state makes complete contraction and complete relaxation
impossible. Estrogen itself intensifies all of these changes of
hypothyroidism, increasing perrmeability and edema, and decreasing the force
of the heart-beat, impairing the diastolic relaxation. Besides its direct
actions, and synergism with hypothyroidism, estrogen also chronically
increases growth hormone, which causes chronic exposure of the blood vessels
to higher levels of free fatty acids (with a bias toward unsaturated fatty
acids), and promotes edema and vascular leakage. Hyperestrogenism, like
hypothyroidism, tends to produce dilution of the body fluids, and is
associated with increased bowel permeability, leading to endotoxemia; both
dilution of the plasma and endotoxemia impair heart function. Progesterone’s
effects are antagonistic to estrogen’s:. Progesterone decreases the formation
of nitric oxide, decreasing edema; it strengthens the heart beat, by improving
venous return and increasing stroke volume, but at the same time it reduces
peripheral resistance by relaxing arteries (by inhibiting calcium entry but
also by other effects, and independently of the endothelium) and decreasing
edematous swelling. The effects of progesterone on the heart and blood vessels
are paralleled by those of carbon dioxide: Increased carbon dioxide increases
perfusion of the heart muscle, increases its stroke volume, and reduces
peripheral resistance. The physical and chemical properties of carbon dioxide
that I have written about previously include protective anti-excitatory and
energy-sustaining functions that explain these effects. Since these effects
have been known for many years, I think it is obvious that the obsessive
interest in explaining these functions in terms of other molecules, such as
nitric oxide, is motivated by the desire for new drugs, not by a desire to
understand the physiology with which the researchers are pretending to deal.
Although women, because of estrogen’s antithyroid actions, are much more
likely to suffer from hypothyroidism than men are, until menopause they have
much higher levels of progesterone than men do. The effects of
hyperestrogenism and hypothyroidism, with lower carbon dioxide production, are
offset by high levels of progesterone. After menopause, women begin to have
heart attacks at a rapidly increasing rate. During the years that men are
beginning to have a considerable risk of heart attacks, with declining thyroid
function indicated by lower T3, their testosterone and progesterone are
declining, while their estrogen is rising. Men who have heart attacks have
much higher levels of estrogen than men at the same age who haven’t had a
heart attack. Whether the issue is free radical damage, vascular permeability
with fat deposition, vascular spasm, edema, decreased heart efficiency, or
blood clotting, the effects of chronic estrogen exposure are counter-adaptive.
Progesterone, by opposing estrogen, is universally protective against vascular
and heart disease. So far, the rule in most estrogen/progesterone research has
been to devise experiments so that claims of benefit can be made for estrogen,
with the expectation that they will meet an uncritical audience. In some
studies, it’s hard to tell whether idiocy or subterfuge is responsible for the
way the experiment was designed and described, for example when synthetic
chemicals with anti-progesterone activity are described as “progesterone.”
Since one estrogen-funded researcher who supposedly found progesterone to be
ineffective as treatment for premenstrual syndrome practically admitted to me
in conversation an intent to mislead, I think it is reasonable to discount
idiocy as the explanation for the tremendous bias in published research. With
the vastly increased resources in the estrogen industry, resulting from the
product promotion “for the prevention of heart disease,” I think we should
expect the research fraud to become increasingly blatant. Rather than being
“heart protective,” estrogen is highly heart-toxic, and it is this that makes
its most important antagonist, progesterone, so important in protecting the
heart and circulatory system. REFERENCES JAMA 1998 Aug 19;280(7):605-13.
Randomized trial of estrogen plus progestin for secondary prevention of
coronary heart disease in postmenopausal women. Heart and Estrogen/progestin
Replacement Study (HERS) Research Group. Hulley S, Grady D, Bush T, Furberg C,
Herrington D, Riggs B, Vittinghoff E University of California, San Francisco
94143, USA. CONTEXT: Observational studies have found lower rates of coronary
heart disease (CHD) in postmenopausal women who take estrogen than in women
who do not, but this potential benefit has not been confirmed in clinical
trials. OBJECTIVE: To determine if estrogen plus progestin therapy alters the
risk for CHD events in postmenopausal women with established coronary disease.
DESIGN: Randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled secondary prevention trial.
SETTING: Outpatient and community settings at 20 US clinical centers.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2763 women with coronary disease, younger than 80
years, and postmenopausal with an intact uterus. Mean age was 66.7 years.
INTERVENTION: Either 0.625 mg of conjugated equine estrogens plus 2.5 mg of
medroxyprogesterone acetate in 1 tablet daily (n = 1380) or a placebo of
identical appearance (n = 1383). Follow-up averaged 4.1 years; 82% of those
assigned to hormone treatment were taking it at the end of 1 year, and 75% at
the end of 3 years. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was the
occurrence of nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI) or CHD death. Secondary
cardiovascular outcomes included coronary revascularization, unstable angina,
congestive heart failure, resuscitated cardiac arrest, stroke or transient
ischemic attack, and peripheral arterial disease. All-cause mortality was also
considered. RESULTS: Overall, there were no significant differences between
groups in the primary outcome or in any of the secondary cardiovascular
outcomes: 172 women in the hormone group and 176 women in the placebo group
had MI or CHD death (relative hazard [RH], 0.99; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.80-1.22). The lack of an overall effect occurred despite a net 11% lower
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level and 10% higher high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol level in the hormone group compared with the placebo
group (each P<.001). Within the overall null effect, there was a statistically
significant time trend, with more CHD events in the hormone group than in the
placebo group in year 1 and fewer in years 4 and 5. More women in the hormone
group than in the placebo group experienced venous thromboembolic events (34
vs 12; RH, 2.89; 95% CI, 1.50-5.58) and gallbladder disease (84 vs 62; RH,
1.38; 95% CI, 1.00-1.92). There were no significant differences in several
other end points for which power was limited, including fracture, cancer, and
total mortality (131 vs 123 deaths; RH, 1.08; 95% CI, 0.84-1.38). CONCLUSIONS:
During an average follow-up of 4.1 years, treatment with oral conjugated
equine estrogen plus medroxyprogesterone acetate did not reduce the overall
rate of CHD events in postmenopausal women with established coronary disease.
The treatment did increase the rate of thromboembolic events and gallbladder
disease. Based on the finding of no overall cardiovascular benefit and a
pattern of early increase in risk of CHD events, we do not recommend starting
this treatment for the purpose of secondary prevention of CHD. However, given
the favorable pattern of CHD Am J Med 1982 Dec;73(6):872-81. Serum estrogen
levels in men with acute myocardial infarction. Klaiber EL, Broverman DM,
Haffajee CI, Hochman JS, Sacks GM, Dalen JE Serum estradiol and serum estrone
levels were assessed in 29 men in 14 men in whom myocardial infarction was
ruled out; in 12 men without apparent coronary heart disease but hospitalized
in an intensive care unit; and in 28 men who were not hospitalized and who
acted as control subjects. (The 12 men who were hospitalized but who did not
have coronary heart disease were included to control for physical and
emotional stress of a severe medical illness.) Ages ranged from 21 to 56
years. Age, height, and weight did not differ significantly among groups.
Blood samples were obtained in the patient groups on each of the first three
days of hospitalization. The serum estrone level was significantly elevated in
all four patient groups when compared with that in the control group. Estrone
level, then, did not differentiate patients with and without coronary heart
disease. Serum estradiol levels were significantly elevated in the groups with
myocardial infarction, unstable angina, and in the group in whom myocardial
infarction was ruled out. However, estradiol levels were not significantly
elevated in the group in the intensive care unit without coronary heart
disease when compared to the level in the normal control group. Serum
estradiol levels, then, were elevated in men with confirmed or suspected
coronary heart disease but were not elevated in men without coronary heart
disease even under the stressful conditions found in an intensive care unit.
Serum estradiol levels were significantly and positively correlated (p less
than 0.03) with serum total creatine phosphokinase levels in the patients with
myocardial infarction. The five patients with myocardial infarction who died
within 10 days of admission had markedly elevated serum estradiol levels. The
potential significance of these serum estradiol elevations is discussed in
terms of estradiol's ability to enhance adrenergic neural activity and the
resultant increase in myocardial oxygen demand. JAMA 1978 Apr
3;239(14):1407-9. Noncontraceptive estrogens and nonfatal myocardial
infarction. Jick H, Dinan B, Rothman KJ We obtained information on 107 women
younger than 46 years discharged from a hospital with a diagnosis of acute
myocardial infarction. In the series there were 17 women aged 39 to 45 years
who were otherwise apparently healthy and had had a natural menopause,
hysterectomy, or tubal ligation or whose spouse had had a vasectomy. Among
them, nine (53%) were taking noncontraceptive estrogens just prior to
admission. Among 34 control women, four (12%) were taking estrogens. The
relative risk estimate, comparing estrogen users with nonusers, is 7.5, with
90% confidence limits of 2.4 and 24. All but one of the 17 ml subjects were
cigarette smokers. While this illness is rare in most healthy young women, the
risk in women older than about 38 years who both smoke and take estrogens
appears to be substantial. JAMA 1978 Apr 3;239(14):1403-6. Oral contraceptives
and nonfatal myocardial infarction. Jick H, Dinan B, Rothman KJ We obtained
information on 107 women younger than 46 years who were discharged from a
hospital with a diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction. In the series 26
women were otherwise apparently healthy and potentially childbearing. Among
these 26 women, 20 (77%) were taking oral contraceptives just prior to
admission, and one was taking conjugated estrogens. Among 59 control women, 14
(24%) were taking oral contraceptives and one was taking conjugated estrogens.
The relative risk estimate, comparing oral contraceptive users with nonusers,
is 14 with 90% confidence limits of 5.5 and 37. All but two of the 26 women
were cigarette smokers. While this illness is rare in most healthy young
women, the risk in women older than about 37 years who both smoke and take
oral contraceptive appears to be high. M. Karmazyn, et al., "Changes in
coronary vascular resistance associated with prolonged hypoxia in isolated rat
hearts: A possible role of prostaglandins,"Life Sciences 25, 1991-1999, 1979.
"if...hypoxic perfusion is prolonged, the initial dilatation passes off and an
intense vasoconstriction results." "The constriction could be prevented by
progesterone but not by estradiol or testosterone." "There is increasing
evidence that angina pectoris and myocardiaol infarction may often be due to
active caronary constriction." "Inhibitors of PG synthesis at high
concentrations prevented or reversed the constriction." (Besides aspirin)
"Chloroquine, procaine and propranolol can all behave as PG antagonists...."
"The failure of estradiol or testosterone to have any effect and the complete
prevention of the constriction by physiological levels of progesterone suggest
that more attention should be paid to this last steroid." "...hypoxia can
cause coronary constriction and...the effect does not occur in young or
progesterone-treated hearts...." Am J Epidemiol 1996 May 15;143(10):971-8.
Prior to use of estrogen replacement therapy, are users healthier than
nonusers? Matthews KA, Kuller LH, Wing RR, Meilahn EN, Plantinga P.
Observational studies have demonstrated that women who have used
postmenopausal estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) are at reduced risk of
coronary heart disease. The authors examined whether premenopausal women who
subsequently elected to use ERT during menopause had a better cardiovascular
risk factor profile prior to use than did nonusers. A total of 541
premenopausal women had their cardiovascular risk factors and psychosocial
characteristics evaluated at study entry. After approximately 8 years, 355
women had become postmenopausal, and 157 women reported ERT use during the
follow-up period (mean = 93.4 months). The authors compared the premenopausal
characteristics of users with those of nonusers. Relative to nonusers, ERT
users were better educated (63 vs. 81% with at least some college), and prior
to the use of ERT had higher levels of high density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol (1.49 vs. 1.59 mmol/liter), HDL2 (0.50 vs. 0.57 mmol/liter), HDL3
(0.98 vs. 1.02 mmol/liter), leisure physical activity (5, 122 vs. 7,158
Kjoules), and alcohol intake (7.5 vs. 9.7 g/day), and lower levels of
apolipoprotein B (0.97 vs. 0.90g/liter), systolic blood pressure (112.1 vs.
107.1 mmHg) and diastolic blood pressure (73.8 vs. 71.4 mmHg), weight (68.5
vs. 64.2 kg), and fasting insulin (9.10 vs. 7.66 microU/liter). Prior to use
of ERT, in comparison with nonusers, subsequent users reported on standardized
questionnaires that they often exhibited Type A behavior, more aware of their
feelings, motives, and symptoms, and had more symptoms of stress. Women who
elect to use ERT have a better cardiovascular risk factor profile prior to the
use of ERT than do women who subsequently do not use this treatment during the
menopause, which supports the hypothesis that part of the apparent benefit
associated with the use of ERT is due to preexisting characteristics of women
who use ERT. This study underscores the widely recognized importance of
randomized clinical trials to estimate the direct benefit of postmenopausal
ERT for protecting women from cardiovascular disease. "Effects of androgens on
haemostasis," Winkler UH, Maturitas, 1996 Jul, 24:3, 147-55. "Androgen
deficiency is associated with an increased incidence of cardiovascular
disease. There is evidence that thromboembolic disease as well as myocardial
infarction in hypogonadic males are mediated by low baseline fibrinolytic
activity. Hypogonadism in males is associated with an enhancement of
fibrinolytic inhibition via increased synthesis of the plasminogen activator
inhibitor PAI 1.” M. Mabry White, et al., “Estrogen, progesterone, and
vascular reactivity: Potential cellular mechanisms," Endocrine Reviews 16(6),
739, 1995. "Female hormones are broadly recognized as affecting susceptibility
to vascular disease...." Migraines, Raynaud's phenomena, primary pulmonary
hypertension are mentioned as vascular disorders with a female predominance.
J. Boczkowski, et al., "Induction of diaphragmatic nitric oxide synthase after
endotoxin administration in rats; role on diaphragmatic contractile
dysfunction," J. Clin. Invest. 98, 1550-1559, 1996. "We conclude that iNOS
[inducible nitric oxide synthase] was induced..." by endotoxin. Arch Int
Pharmacodyn Ther 1986 May;281(1):57-65. Effects of 17 beta-estradiol on the
isolated rabbit heart. Raddino R, Manca C, Poli E, Bolognesi R, Visioli O. We
have studied the effects of 17 beta-estradiol on the left ventricular pressure
and on the coronary perfusion pressure in isolated rabbit heart, in order to
evaluate the action of this hormone on the myocardial contractility and on the
coronary resistances. 17 beta-Estradiol has induced a negative inotropic
effect starting from a concentration of 10(-6) M and a vasodilation starting
from 10(-7) M when administered on a vasopressin-induced coronary spasm. These
effects are not related to sex or to alpha-, beta-adrenergic, histaminergic,
anaesthetic-like mechanisms, but seem to interfere with calcium transport. Med
Hypotheses 1997 Aug;49(2):183-5. Coronary artery spasm: a hypothesis on
prevention by progesterone. Kanda I, Endo M. Department of Surgery, Heart
Institute of Japan, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan. The mechanism of
coronary artery spasm has been hypothesized as follows: the dormant gene of
the smooth muscle of the human coronary artery is identical or similar to the
active gene of the smooth muscle of ductus arteriosus, but can be activated by
estrogen. The activation could be preventable by progesterone. The prevention
is due to the reduction of the number of estrogen receptors of the smooth
muscle of the coronary artery. J. Bolanos, et al., "Nitric oxide-mediated
inhibition of the mitochondrial respiratory chain in cultured astrocytes," J.
Neurochem. 63, 910-916, 1994. M. Cleeter, et al., "Reversible inhibition of
cytochrome C oxidase, the terminal enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory
chain, by nitric oxide," FEBS Lett. 345, 50-54, 1994. Ann Thorac Surg 1999
Sep;68(3):925-30. Coronary perfusate composition influences diastolic
properties, myocardial water content, and histologic characteristics of the
rat left ventricle. Starr JP, Jia CX, Amirhamzeh MM, Rabkin DG, Hart JP, Hsu
DT, Fisher PE, Szabolcs M, Spotnitz HM. “Recent studies found that edema,
histology, and left ventricular diastolic compliance exhibit quantitative
relationships in rats. Edema due to low osmolarity coronary perfusates
increases myocardial water content and histologic edema score and decreases
left ventricular filling. The present study examined effects of perfusate
osmolarity and chemical composition on rat hearts.” “Myocardial water content
reflected perfusate osmolarity, being lowest in Stanford and University of
Wisconsin solutions (p<0.05 versus other groups) and highest in dilute
Plegisol (p<0.05). Left ventricular filling volumes were smallest in dilute
Plegisol and Plegisol (p<0.05).” “Perfusate osmolarity determined myocardial
water content and left ventricular filling volume. However, perfusate chemical
composition influenced the histologic appearance of edema. Pathologic grading
of edema can be influenced by factors other than osmolarity alone.”
Progesterone inhibits inducible nitric oxide synthase gene expression and
nitric oxide production in murine macrophages. Miller L; et al J Leukoc Biol,
59(3):442-50 1996 Mar. The purpose of this study was to determine whether the
female hormones estradiol-l7 beta (E2) and progesterone (P4) influence
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and the production of nitric oxide (NO)
by interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated mouse
macrophages. Treatment with P4 alone caused a time- and dose-dependent
inhibition of NO production by macrophage cell lines (RAW 264.7, J774) and
mouse bone marrow culture-derived macrophages as assessed by nitrite
accumulation. RAW 264.7 cells transiently transfected with an iNOS gene
promoter/luciferase reporter-gene construct that were stimulated with IFN-
gamma/LPS in the presence of P4 displayed reduced luciferase activity and NO
production. Analysis of RAW 264.7 cells by Northern blot hybridization
revealed concurrent P4-mediated reduction in iNOS mRNA. These observations
suggest that P4-mediated inhibition of NO may be an important gender-based
difference within females and males that relates to macrophage-mediated host
defense. Testosterone relaxes rabbit coronary arteries and aorta. Yue P;
Chatterjee K; Beale C; Poole-Wilson PA; Collins P Department of Cardiac
Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, London, UK. Circulation, 1995 Feb
15, 91:4, 1154-60 “Testosterone induces endothelium-independent relaxation in
isolated rabbit coronary artery and aorta, which is neither mediated by
prostaglandin I2 or cyclic GMP. Potassium conductance and potassium channels
but not ATP-sensitive potassium channels may be involved partially in the
mechanism of testosterone-induced relaxation. The in vitro relaxation is
independent of sex and of a classic receptor. The coronary artery is
significantly more sensitive to relaxation by testosterone than the aorta.
Testosterone is a more potent relaxing agent of rabbit coronary artery than
other testosterone analogues.” J. Nakamura, et al., "Estrogen regulates
vascular endothelial growth permeability factor expression in 7,12-dimethyl-
benz(a)anthracene-induced rat mammary tumors," Endocrinology 137(12_,
5589-5596, 1996. ("...one mechanism by which estrogen acts as a mammary tumor
promotor is by stimulating VEG/PF, leading to increased tumor angiogenesis
and/or permeability of the microvessels to allow tumor cell migration.") D. A.
Barber, et al., "Endothelin receptors are modulated in association with
endogenous fluctuations in estrogen," Amer. J. of Physiology--Heart and
Circulatory Physiology 40(5), H1999-H2006, 1996. ("...contractions to
endothelin-1 but not endothelin-3 or sarafotoxin S6c were significantly
greater in coronary arterial rings from female comparred with male pigs...."
"In addition, independent of endogenous estrogen status, coronary arteries
from female pigs generate significantly greater contractions to endothelin-1
compared with male pigs. This phenomenon occurs at the level of smooth muscle
and is not dependent on the endothelium or synthesis of nitric oide or
prostaglandins." T. M. Chou, et al, "Testosterone induces dilation of canine
coronary conductance and resistance arteries in vivo," Circulation 94(10),
2614-2619, 1996. K. Sudhir, et al., "Estrogen enhances basal nitric oxide
release in the forearm vasculature in perimenopausal women," Hypertension
28(3), 330-334, 1996. G. Sitzler, et al., "Investigation of the negative
inotropic effects of 17-beta-oestradiol in human isolated myocardial tissues,"
British J. of Pharmacology 119(1), 43-48, 1996. S. M. Hyder, et al., "Uterine
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor is increased by estradiol and
tamoxifen," Cancer Research 56(17), 3954-3960, 1996. ("These findings raise
the possibility that estrogen and antiestrogen effects on uterine edema,
proliferation, and tumor incidence may involve local increases in tissue VEGF
production.") N. Ferrara and T. Davis-Smyth, "The biology of vascular
endothelial growth factor," Endocrine Reviews 18(1), 4-19,? 1997. "...induces
vasodilatation in vitro in a dose-dependent fashion and produces transient
tachycardia, hypotension, and a decrease in cardiac output when injected
intravenously in conscious...rats. Such effects appear to be caused by a
decrease in venous return, mediated primarily by endothelial cell-derived
nitric oxide...." "Recently, elevation of VEGF in the peritoneal fluid of
patients with endometriosis has been reported.""...it has been suggested that
VEGF up-regulation plays a pathogenic role in the capillary hyperpermeability
that characterizes ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome as well as in the
dysfunctional endothelium of preeclampsia." B. Jilma, et al, "Sex differences
in concentrtions of exhaled nitric oxide and plasma nitrate," Life Sciences
58*6), 469-476, 1996. ("Nitric oxide is generally considered as an endogenous
vasoprotective agent." "...men exhaled 50% more NO and had 99% higher
(nitrate) NO3 levels than women." Progesterone inhibits inducible nitric oxide
synthase gene expression and nitric oxide production in murine macrophages.
Miller L; et al J Leukoc Biol, 59(3):442-50 1996 Mar. “Treatment with P4 alone
caused a time- and dose-dependent inhibition of NO production by macrophage
cell lines (RAW 264.7, J774) and mouse bone marrow culture-derived macrophages
as assessed by nitrite accumulation. RAW 264.7 cells transiently transfected
with an iNOS gene promoter/luciferase reporter-gene construct that were
stimulated with IFN-gamma/LPS in the presence of P4 displayed reduced
luciferase activity and NO production. Analysis of RAW 264.7 cells by Northern
blot hybridization revealed concurrent P4-mediated reduction in iNOS mRNA.
These observations suggest that P4-mediated inhibition of NO may be an
important gender-based difference within females and males that relates to
macrophage-mediated host defense.” Int J Epidemiol 1990 Jun;19(2):297-302.
Relationship of menopausal status and sex hormones to serum lipids and blood
pressure. Wu ZY, Wu XK, Zhang YW. “Conditional logistic regression analysis
found that progesterone is a protective factor only and testosterone is one of
the risk factors for hypertension.” Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1990
Oct;37(2):325-7. Steroid sex hormones and cardiovascular function in healthy
males and females: a correlational study. Lundberg U, Wallin L, Lindstedt G,
Frankenhaeuser M Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Karolinska
Institutet, Sweden. “The relationship of serum estradiol and testosterone
levels to systolic (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and heart rate
(HR) was examined in healthy nonsmoking males (n = 30) and females (n = 22),
30-50 years of age (mean age for men = 41.2, women = 39.9). Postmenopausal
women and women taking oral contraceptives had been excluded. Testosterone
levels in women were positively correlated with SBP, DBP and HR, after
removing the effects of age and body mass. Positive correlations were also
found between estradiol and SBP and HR in women.” Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1993
Jul;53(4):353-8. Effects of ovarian stimulation on blood pressure and plasma
catecholamine levels. Tollan A, Oian P, Kjeldsen SE, Holst N, Eide I. “After
stimulation a positive correlation was observed between systolic blood
pressure and arterial adrenaline (r = 0.73, p = 0.027), and between systolic
blood pressure and the arterial-venous difference for adrenaline (r = 0.81, p
= 0.007). The increased venous noradrenaline levels may be a reflex-mediated
activation of the sympathetic nervous tone due to a decrease in blood
pressure, or may indicate reduced neuronal re-uptake of released
noradrenaline. The mechanisms behind the strong correlation between adrenaline
and blood pressure are unclear, but may be induced by the supraphysiological
oestradiol levels.” J Mol Cell Cardiol 1986 Dec;18(12):1207-18. Post-ischemic
cardiac chamber stiffness and coronary vasomotion: the role of edema and
effects of dextran. Vogel WM, Cerel AW, Apstein CS. “Contributions of edema to
left ventricular (LV) chamber stiffness and coronary resistance after ischemia
were studied in isolated buffer-perfused rabbit hearts, with constant LV
chamber volume, subjected to 30 min global ischemia and 60 min reperfusion.
During reperfusion hearts were perfused with standard buffer or with 3%
dextran to increase oncotic pressure and decrease water content.” “Coronary
resistance in untreated ischemic hearts increased by 26% from 2.0 +/- 0.06 to
2.6 +/- 0.06 mmHg/ml/min after 60 min reperfusion. In treated hearts coronary
resistance increased by 16% from 1.9 +/- 0.09 to 2.2 +/- 0.09 mm/Hg/ml/min (P
less than 0.01 v. untreated ischemic). To determine whether the decrease in
coronary resistance with dextran could be ascribed to active vasodilation,
dilator responses to 2 min hypoxia or 10(-4)M adenosine were tested in
nonischemic and reperfused ischemic hearts. Dilator responses were stable in
nonischemic hearts or hearts reperfused after 15 min ischemia but after 30 min
ischemia the dilator response to hypoxia was reduced by 72% (P less than
0.025) and the dilator response to adenosine was eliminated (P less than
0.02). Thus the response to dextran was unlike that of a direct vasodilator.
These data suggest that myocardial edema plays a significant role in
maintaining increased ventricular chamber stiffness and coronary resistance
during reperfusion after ischemia.” Experientia 1980 Dec 15;36(12):1402-3.
Bilinear correlation between tissue water content and diastolic stiffness of
the ventricular myocardium. Pogatsa G. In oedematous and dehydrated canine
hearts a close bilinear correlation was demonstrated between myocardial water
content and diastolic stiffness (characterized by the passive elastic modulus)
with an optimal minimum of stiffness at normal myocardial water content. S Afr
Med J 1975 Dec 27;49(55):2251-4. Effect of natural oestrogens on blood
pressure and weight in postmenopausal women. Notelovitz M. “An investigation
of the effect of conjugated oestorgens (USP) on the blood pressure and weight
gain of postmenopausal women was undertaken. Fifty-one unselected women were
treated for one year with cyclically administered conjugated oestrogen. Both
the mean systolic and diastolic blood pressures of those in the group
increased, but only the diastolic was significantly elevated.” “The
significance of the change in blood pressure is commented upon, and the
recommendation that postmenopausal women on oestrogen replacement therapy
should have their blood pressure measured every 6 months is made.” Am J
Hypertens 1995 Mar;8(3):249-53. Ambulatory blood pressure in mild hypertensive
women taking oral contraceptives. A case-control study. Narkiewicz K, Graniero
GR, D'Este D, Mattarei M, Zonzin P, Palatini P. “Both daytime and nighttime
systolic blood pressure values were significantly higher in oral contraceptive
users. There was an average 8.3 mm Hg difference (95% confidence interval, 3.0
to 13.7 mm Hg; P = .003) for the daytime and 6.1 mm Hg difference (95%
confidence interval, 0.4 to 11.8 mm Hg; P = .04) for the nighttime.” “Our
results support the opinion that alternative methods of contraception should
be considered for hypertensive women in place of oral contraceptives.” Am J
Surg Pathol 1995 Apr;19(4):454-62. Reversible ischemic colitis in young women.
Association with oral contraceptive use. Deana DG, Dean PJ. .”Ischemic
colitis, a condition of middle-aged to elderly patients, occurs uncommonly in
younger persons.” “Ten women (59%) were using low-dose estrogenic oral
contraceptive agents, compared with the 1988 national average of 18.5% oral
contraceptive users among females aged 15 to 44 years. The calculated odds
ratio yielded a greater than sixfold relative risk for the occurrence of
ischemic colitis among oral contraceptive users. In addition, four women not
currently on hormonal contraceptive therapy had a past history of oral
contraceptive use; the three remaining women were taking estrogen as
replacement therapy after oophorectomy. In one patient, documented reversible
ischemic colitis recurred on resumption of oral contraceptive use....”
“...spontaneous ischemic colitis is a disorder found almost exclusively in
women and is associated with the clinical use of exogenous estrogenic agents.”
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993 Jun;76(6):1542-7. Differential changes in serum
concentrations of androgens and estrogens (in relation with cortisol) in
postmenopausal women with acute illness. Spratt DI, Longcope C, Cox PM, Bigos
ST, Wilbur-Welling C. “We evaluated relationships between changes in serum
levels of cortisol (F), androgens, estrogens, and gonadotropins in 20
postmenopausal women with acute critical illness to determine if changes in
adrenal androgens and estrogens paralleled gonadal axis suppression or adrenal
stimulation. Two patterns of changes in sex steroids were observed. Admission
serum levels of androstenedione (delta 4-A), estradiol, and estrone, like F,
were increased compared to healthy controls (P < 0.0001). delta 4-A and
estrone then decreased toward normal by day 5 in parallel with cortisol (r =
0.56 and 0.60).” “The decreased serum T levels suggest inhibition of 17 beta-
OH-dehydrogenase and/or increased aromatization to estradiol.The marked
increase in serum estrogen levels also suggests increased aromatization. The
absence of increases in DHEA and DHEA-S suggest enhanced activity of 3 beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and/or inhibition of C17,20-lyase activity of
P-450c17.”. ^^^ Top ^^^

