![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**The dark side of stress (learned helplessness)**

==========================================

Acetylcholine is the "neurotransmitter" of cholinergic nerves, including the
parasympathetic system.

Cholinesterase (or acetylcholinesterase) is an enzyme that destroys
acetylcholine, limiting the action of the cholinergic nerves.

Attaching a phosphate group to the cholinesterase enzyme inactivates it,
prolonging and intensifying the action of cholinergic stimulation.

==========================================

The autonomic nervous system has traditionally been divided into the
sympathetic-adrenergic system, and the parasympathetic-cholinergic system,
with approximately opposing functions, intensifying energy expenditure and
limiting energy expenditure, respectively. The hormonal system and the
behavioral system interact with these systems, and each is capable of
disrupting the others. Disruptive factors in the environment have increased in
recent decades.

==========================================

Living is development; the choices we make create our individuality. If
genetically identical mice grow up in a large and varied environment, small
differences in their experience will affect cell growth in their brains,
leading to large differences in their exploratory behavior as they age
(Freund, et al., 2013). Geneticists used to say that "genes determine our
limits," but this experiment shows that an environment can provide both
limitations and opportunities for expanding the inherited potential. If our
environment restricts our choices, our becoming human is thwarted, the way
rats' potentials weren't discovered when they were kept in the standard little
laboratory boxes. An opportunity to be complexly involved in a complex
environment lets us become more of what we are, more humanly differentiated.

A series of experiments that started at the University of California in 1960
found that rats that lived in larger spaces with various things to explore
were better at learning and solving problems than rats that were raised in the
standard little laboratory cages (Krech, et al., 1960). Studying their brains,
they found that the enzyme cholinesterase, which destroys the
neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, was increased. They later found that the
offspring of these rats were better learners than their parents, and their
brains contained more cholinesterase. Their brains were also larger, with a
considerable thickening of the cortex, which is considered to be the part
mainly responsible for complex behavior, learning and intelligence.

These processes aren't limited to childhood. For example, London taxi drivers
who learn all the streets in the city develop a larger hippocampus, an area of
the brain involved with memory.

The 1960s research into environmental enrichment coincided with political
changes in the US, but it went against the dominant scientific ideas of the
time. Starting in 1945, the US government had begun a series of projects to
develop techniques of behavior modification or mind control, using drugs,
isolation, deprivation, and torture. In the 1950s, psychiatry often used
lobotomies (about 80,000, before they were generally discontinued in the
1980s) and electroconvulsive "therapy," and university psychologists tortured
animals, often as part of developing techniques for controlling behavior.

The CIA officially phased out their MKultra program in 1967, but that was the
year that Martin Seligman, at the University of Pennsylvania, popularized the
idea of "learned helplessness." He found that when an animal was unable to
escape from torture, even for a very short time, it would often fail to even
try to escape the next time it was tortured. Seligman's lectures have been
attended by psychologists who worked at Guantanamo, and he recently received a
no-bid Pentagon grant of $31,000,000, to develop a program of "comprehensive
soldier fitness," to train marines to avoid learned helplessness.

Curt Richter already in 1957 had described the "hopelessness" phenomenon in
rats (“a reaction of hopelessness is shown by some wild rats very soon after
being grasped in the hand and prevented from moving. They seem literally to
give up,”) and even how to cure their hopelessness, by allowing them to have
an experience of escaping once (Richter, 1957, 1958). Rats which would
normally be able to keep swimming in a tank for two or three days, would often
give up and drown in just a few minutes, after having an experience of
"inescapable stress." Richter made the important discovery that the hearts of
the hopeless rats slowed down before they died, remaining relaxed and filled
with blood, revealing the dominant activity of the vagal nerve, secreting
acetylcholine.

The sympathetic nervous system (secreting noradrenaline) accelerates the
heart, and is usually activated in stress, in the "fight or flight" reaction,
but this radically different (parasympathetic) nervous activity hadn't
previously been seen to occur in stressful situations. The parasympathetic,
cholinergic, nervous system had been thought of as inactive during stress, and
activated to regulate processes of digestion, sleep, and repair. Besides the
cholinergic nerves of the parasympathetic system, many nerves of the central
nervous system also secrete acetylcholine, which activates smooth muscles,
skeletal muscles, glands, and other nerves, and also has some inhibitory
effects. The parasympathetic nerves also secrete the enzyme, cholinesterase,
which destroys acetylcholine. However, many other types of cell (red blood
cells, fibroblasts, sympathetic nerves, marrow cells), maybe all cells, can
secrete cholinesterase.

Because cholinergic nerves have been opposed to the sympathetic, adrenergic,
nerves, there has been a tendency to neglect their nerve exciting roles, when
looking at causes of excitotoxicity, or the stress-induced loss of brain
cells. Excessive cholinergic stimulation, however, can contribute to
excitotoxic cell death, for example when it's combined with high cortisol
and/or hypoglycemia.

Drugs that block the stimulating effects of acetylcholine (the
anticholinergics) as well as chemicals that mimic the effects of
acetylcholine, such as the organophosphate insecticides, can impair the
ability to think and learn. This suggested to some people that age-related
dementia was the result of the deterioration of the cholinergic nerves in the
brain. Drugs to increase the stimulating effects of acetylcholine in the brain
(by inactivating cholinesterase) were promoted as treatment for Alzheimer's
disease.

Although herbal inhibitors were well known, profitable new drugs, starting
with Tacrine, were put into use. It was soon evident that Tacrine was causing
serious liver damage, but wasn't slowing the rate of mental deterioration.

As the failure of the cholinergic drug Tacrine was becoming commonly known,
another drug, amantadine (later, the similar memantine) was proposed for
combined treatment. In the 1950s, the anticholinergic drug atropine was
proposed a few times for treating dementia, and amantadine, which was also
considered anticholinergic, was proposed for some mental conditions, including
Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (Sanders and Dunn, 1973). It must have seemed odd to
propose that an anticholinergic drug be used to treat a condition that was
being so profitably treated with a pro-cholinergic drug, but memantine came to
be classified as an anti-excitatory "NMDA blocker," to protect the remaining
cholinergic nerves, so that both drugs could logically be prescribed
simultaneously. The added drug seems to have a small beneficial effect, but
there has been no suggestion that this could be the result of its previously-
known anticholinergic effects.

Over the years, some people have suspected that Alzheimer's disease might be
caused partly by a lack of purpose and stimulation in their life, and have
found that meaningful, interesting activity could improve their mental
functioning. Because the idea of a "genetically determined hard-wired" brain
is no longer taught so dogmatically, there is increasing interest in this
therapy for all kinds of brain impairment. The analogy to the Berkeley
enrichment experience is clear, so the association of increasing
cholinesterase activity with improving brain function should be of interest.

The after-effect of poisoning by nerve gas or insecticide has been compared to
the dementia of old age. The anticholinergic drugs are generally recognized
for protecting against those toxins. Traumatic brain injury, even with
improvement in the short term, often starts a long-term degenerative process,
greatly increasing the likelihood of dementia at a later age. A cholinergic
excitotoxic process is known to be involved in the traumatic degeneration of
nerves (Lyeth and Hayes, 1992), and the use of anticholinergic drugs has been
recommended for many years to treat traumatic brain injuries (e.g., Ward,
1950: Ruge, 1954; Hayes, et al., 1986).

In 1976 there was an experiment (Rosellini, et al.) that made an important
link between the enrichment experiments and the learned helplessness
experiments. The control animals in the enrichment experiments were singly
housed, while the others shared a larger enclosure. In the later experiment,
it was found that the rats "who were reared in isolation died suddenly when
placed in a stressful swimming situation," while the group-housed animals were
resistant, effective swimmers. Enrichment and deprivation have very clear
biological meaning, and one is the negation of the other.

The increase of cholinesterase, the enzyme that destroys acetylcholine, during
enrichment, serves to inactivate cholinergic processes. If deprivation does
its harm by increasing the activity of the cholinergic system, we should
expect that a cholinergic drug might substitute for inescapable stress, as a
cause of learned helplessness, and that an anticholinergic drug could cure
learned helplessness. Those tests have been done: "Treatment with the
anticholinesterase, physostigmine, successfully mimicked the effects of
inescapable shock." "The centrally acting anticholinergic scopolamine
hydrobromide antagonized the effects of physostigmine, and when administered
prior to escape testing antagonized the disruptive effects of previously
administered inescapable shock." (Anisman, et al., 1981.)

This kind of experiment would suggest that the anticholinesterase drugs still
being used for Alzheimer's disease treatment aren't biologically helpful. In
an earlier newsletter I discussed the changes of growth hormone, and its
antagonist somatostatin, in association with dementia: Growth hormone
increases, somatostatin decreases. The cholinergic nerves are a major factor
in shifting those hormones in the direction of dementia, and the
anticholinergic drugs tend to increase the ratio of somatostatin to growth
hormone. Somatostatin and cholinesterase have been found to co-exist in single
nerve cells (Delfs, et al., 1984).

Estrogen, which was promoted so intensively as prevention or treatment for
Alzheimer's disease, was finally shown to contribute to its development. One
of the characteristic effects of estrogen is to increase the level of growth
hormone in the blood. This is just one of many ways that estrogen is
associated with cholinergic activation. During pregnancy, it's important for
the uterus not to contract. Cholinergic stimulation causes it to contract; too
much estrogen activates that system, and causes miscarriage if it's excessive.
An important function of progesterone is to keep the uterus relaxed during
pregnancy. In the uterus, and in many other systems, progesterone increases
the activity of cholinesterase, removing the acetylcholine which, under the
influence of estrogen, would cause the uterus to contract.

Progesterone is being used to treat brain injuries, very successfully. It
protects against inflammation, and in an early study, compared to placebo,
lowered mortality by more than half. It's instructive to consider its
anticholinergic role in the uterus, in relation to its brain protective
effects. When the brain is poisoned by an organophosphate insecticide, which
lowers the activity of cholinesterase, seizures are likely to occur, and
treatment with progesterone can prevent those seizures, reversing the
inhibition of the enzyme (and increasing the activity of cholinesterase in
rats that weren't poisoned) (Joshi, et al., 2010). Similar effects of
progesterone on cholinesterase occur in menstrually cycling women
(Fairbrother, et al., 1989), implying that this is a general function of
progesterone, not just something to protect pregnancy. Estrogen, with similar
generality, decreases the activity of cholinesterase. DHEA, like progesterone,
increases the activity of cholinesterase, and is brain protective (Aly, et
al., 2011).

Brain trauma consistently leads to decreased activity of this enzyme (Östberg,
et al., 2011; Donat, et al., 2007), causing the acetylcholine produced in the
brain to accumulate, with many interesting consequences. In 1997, a group
(Pike, et al.) created brain injuries in rats to test the idea that a
cholinesterase inhibitor would improve their recovery and ability to move
through a maze. They found instead that it reduced the cognitive ability of
both the injured and normal rats. An anticholinergic drug, selegeline
(deprenyl) that is used to treat Parkinson's disease and, informally, as a
mood altering antiaging drug, was found by a different group (Zhu, et al.,
2000) to improve cognitive recovery from brain injuries.

One of acetylcholine's important functions, in the brain as elsewhere, is the
relaxation of blood vessels, and this is done by activating the synthesis of
NO, nitric oxide. (Without NO, acetylcholine constricts blood vessels;
Librizzi, et al., 2000.) The basic control of blood flow in the brain is the
result of the relaxation of the wall of blood vessels in the presence of
carbon dioxide, which is produced in proportion to the rate at which oxygen
and glucose are being metabolically combined by active cells. In the inability
of cells to produce CO2 at a normal rate, nitric oxide synthesis in blood
vessels can cause them to dilate. The mechanism of relaxation by NO is very
different, however, involving the inhibition of mitochondrial energy
production (Barron, et al., 2001). Situations that favor the production and
retention of a larger amount of carbon dioxide in the tissues are likely to
reduce the basic "tone" of the parasympathetic nervous system, as there is
less need for additional vasodilation.

Nitric oxide can diffuse away from the blood vessels, affecting the energy
metabolism of nerve cells (Steinert, et al., 2010). Normally, astrocytes
protect nerve cells from nitric oxide (Chen, et al., 2001), but that function
can be altered, for example by bacterial endotoxin absorbed from the intestine
(Solà, et al., 2002) or by amyloid-beta (Tran, 2001), causing them to produce
nitric oxide themselves.

Nitric oxide is increasingly seen as an important factor in nerve degeneration
(Doherty, 2011). Nitric oxide activates processes (Obukuro, et al., 2013) that
can lead to cell death. Inhibiting the production of nitric oxide protects
against various kinds of dementia (Sharma & Sharma, 2013; Sharma & Singh,
2013). Brain trauma causes a large increase in nitric oxide formation, and
blocking its synthesis improves recovery (Hüttemann, et al., 2008; Gahm, et
al., 2006). Organophosphates increase nitric oxide formation, and the
protective anticholinergic drugs such as atropine reduce it (Chang, et al.,
2001; Kim, et al., 1997). Stress, including fear (Campos, et al., 2013) and
isolation (ZlatkoviÄ & FilipoviÄ, 2013) can activate the formation of nitric
oxide, and various mediators of inflammation also activate it. The nitric
oxide in a person's exhaled breath can be used to diagnose some diseases, and
it probably also reflects the level of their emotional well-being.

The increase of cholinesterase by enriched living serves to protect tissues
against an accumulation of acetylcholine. The activation of nitric oxide
synthesis by acetylcholine tends to block energy production, and to activate
autolytic or catabolic processes, which are probably involved in the
development of a thinner cerebral cortex in isolated or stressed animals.
Breaking down acetylcholine rapidly, the tissue renewal processes are able to
predominate in the enriched animals.

Environmental conditions that are favorable for respiratory energy production
are protective against learned helplessness and neurodegeneration, and other
biological problems that involve the same mechanisms. Adaptation to high
altitude, which stimulates the formation of new mitochondria and increased
thyroid (T3) activity, has been used for many years to treat neurological
problems, and the effect has been demonstrated in animal experiments
(Manukhina, et al., 2010). Bright light can reverse the cholinergic effects of
inescapable stress (Flemmer, et al., 1990).

During the development of learned helplessness, the T3 level in the blood
decreases (Helmreich, et al., 2006), and removal of the thyroid gland creates
the "escape deficit," while supplementing with thyroid hormone before exposing
the animal to inescapable shock prevents its development (Levine, et al.,
1990). After learned helplessness has been created in rats, supplementing with
T3 reverses it (Massol, et al., 1987, 1988).

Hypothyroidism and excess cholinergic tone have many similarities, including
increased formation of nitric oxide, so that similar symptoms, such as muscle
inflammation, can be produced by cholinesterase inhibitors such as Tacrine, by
increased nitric oxide, or by simple hypothyroidism (Jeyarasasingam, et al.,
2000; Franco, et al., 2006).

Insecticide exposure has been suspected to be a factor in the increased
incidence of Alzheimer's disease (Zaganas, et al., 2013), but it could be
contributing to many other problems, involving inflammation, edema, and
degeneration. Another important source of organophosphate poisoning is the air
used to pressurize airliners, which can be contaminated with organophosphate
fumes coming from the engine used to compress it.

Possibly the most toxic component of our environment is the way the society
has been designed, to eliminate meaningful choices for most people. In the
experiment of Freund, et al., some mice became more exploratory because of the
choices they made, while others' lives became more routinized and limited. Our
culture reinforces routinized living. In the absence of opportunities to vary
the way you work and live to accord with new knowledge that you gain, the
nutritional, hormonal and physical factors have special importance.

Supplements of thyroid and progesterone are proven to be generally protective
against the cholinergic threats, but there are many other factors that can be
adjusted according to particular needs. Niacinamide, like progesterone,
inhibits the production of nitric oxide, and also like progesterone, it
improves recovery from brain injury (Hoane, et al., 2008). In genetically
altered mice with an Alzheimer's trait, niacinamide corrects the defect
(Green, et al., 2008). Drugs such as atropine and antihistamines can be used
in crisis situations. Bright light, without excess ultraviolet, should be
available every day.

The cholinergic system is much more than a part of the nervous system, and is
involved in cell metabolism and tissue renewal. Most people can benefit from
reducing intake of phosphate, iron, and polyunsaturated fats (which can
inhibit cholinesterase; Willis, et al., 2009), and from choosing foods that
reduce production and absorption of endotoxin. And, obviously, drugs that are
intended to increase the effects of nitric oxide (asparagine,
zildenafil/Viagra, minoxidil/Rogaine) and acetylcholine (bethanechol,
benzpyrinium, etc.) should be avoided.

REFERENCES

Acta Biochim Pol. 2011;58(4):513-20. **Neuroprotective effects of
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in rat model of Alzheimer's disease.** Aly HF,
Metwally FM, Ahmed HH.

Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1981;74(1):81-7. **Cholinergic influences on escape
deficits produced by uncontrollable stress.** Anisman H, Glazier SJ, Sklar LS.

Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Nov 1;1506(3):204-11. **Endothelial- and nitric
oxide-dependent effects on oxidative metabolism of intact artery.** Barron JT,
Gu L, Parrillo JE.

Psychiatry Res. 1987 Jul;21(3):267-75. **Triiodothyronine potentiation of
antidepressant-induced reversal of learned helplessness in rats.** Brochet DM,
Martin P, Soubrié P, Simon P.

Behav Brain Res. 2013 Aug 12. pii: S0166-4328(13)00482-8. **Increased nitric
oxide-mediated neurotransmission in the medial prefrontal cortex is associated
with the long lasting anxiogenic-like effect of predator exposure.** Campos
AC, Piorino EM, Ferreira FR, Guimarães FS.

J Biomed Sci. 2001 Nov-Dec;8(6):475-83. **Engagement of inducible nitric oxide
synthase at the rostral ventrolateral medulla during mevinphos intoxication in
the rat.** Chang AY, Chan JY, Kao FJ, Huang CM, Chan SH.

Science. 1984 Jan 6;223(4631):61-3. **Coexistence of acetylcholinesterase and
somatostatin-immunoreactivity in neurons cultured from rat cerebrum.** Delfs
JR, Zhu CH, Dichter MA.

Neurosci Bull. 2011 Dec;27(6):366-82. **Nitric oxide in neurodegeneration:
potential benefits of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories.** Doherty GH.18.

Brain Inj. 2007 Sep;21(10):1031-7. **Alterations of acetylcholinesterase
activity after traumatic brain injury in rats.** Donat CK, Schuhmann MU, Voigt
C, Nieber K, Schliebs R, Brust P.

Environ Res. 1989 Aug;49(2):181-9. **Influence of menstrual cycle on serum
cholinesterase.** Fairbrother A, Wagner SL, Welch S, Smith BB.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1990 Aug;36(4):775-8. **Bright light blocks the
capacity of inescapable swim stress to supersensitize a central muscarinic
mechanism.** Flemmer DD, Dilsaver SC, Peck JA.

J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4779-86. **Hypothyroid phenotype is
contributed by mitochondrial complex I inactivation due to translocated
neuronal nitric-oxide synthase.** Franco MC, Antico Arciuch VG, Peralta JG,
Galli S, Levisman D, López LM, Romorini L, Poderoso JJ, Carreras MC.

J Neurotrauma. 2006 Sep;23(9):1343-54. **Neuroprotection by selective
inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase after experimental brain
contusion.** Gahm C, Holmin S, Wiklund PN, Brundin L, Mathiesen T.

Exp Neurol. 2005 Jun;193(2):522-30. **Progesterone suppresses the inflammatory
response and nitric oxide synthase-2 expression following cerebral ischemia.**
Gibson CL, Constantin D, Prior MJ, Bath PM, Murphy SP.

J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 5;28(45):11500-10. **Nicotinamide restores cognition in
Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice via a mechanism involving sirtuin
inhibition and selective reduction of Thr231-phosphotau.** Green KN, Steffan
JS, Martinez-Coria H, Sun X, Schreiber SS, Thompson LM, LaFerla FM.

Cent Nerv Syst Trauma. 1986 Spring;3(2):163-73. **Metabolic and
neurophysiologic sequelae of brain injury: a cholinergic hypothesis.** Hayes
RL, Stonnington HH, Lyeth BG, Dixon CE, Yamamoto T.

Physiol Behav. 2006 Jan 30;87(1):114-9. **Peripheral triiodothyronine (T(3))
levels during escapable and inescapable footshock.** Helmreich DL, Crouch M,
Dorr NP, Parfitt DB.

**Neuroscience. 2008 Jun 26;154(3):861-8. Nicotinamide treatment induces
behavioral recovery when administered up to 4 hours following cortical
contusion injury in the rat.** Hoane MR, Pierce JL, Holland MA, Anderson GD.

Neuroscience. 2008 Jan 2;151(1):148-54. **Suppression of the inducible form of
nitric oxide synthase prior to traumatic brain injury improves cytochrome c
oxidase activity and normalizes cellular energy levels.** Hüttemann M, Lee I,
Kreipke CW, Petrov T.

Neuroreport. 2000 Apr 27;11(6):1173-6. **Tacrine, a reversible
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, induces myopathy.** Jeyarasasingam G,
Yeluashvili M, Quik M.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000 Oct;295(1):314-20. **Nitric oxide is involved in
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor-induced myopathy in rats.** Jeyarasasingam G,
Yeluashvili M, Quik M.

Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2010 Oct;382(4):311-20. **Effect of
phosphamidon on convulsive behavior and biochemical parameters: modulation by
progesterone and 4'-chlorodiazepam in rats.** Joshi V, Arora T, Mehta AK,
Sharma AK, Rathor N, Mehta KD, Mahajan P, Mediratta PK, Banerjee BD, Sharma
KK.

Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997 Feb 15;3(1):53-6. **A role of nitric oxide in
organophosphate-induced convulsions.** Kim YB, Hur GH, Lee YS, Han BG, Shin S.

J Comp Physiol Psychol. 1960 Dec;53:509-19. **Effects of environmental
complexity and training on brain chemistry.** Krech D, Rosenzweig MR, Bennett
EL.

Physiol Behav. 1990 Jul;48(1):165-7. **Thyroparathyroidectomy produces a
progressive escape deficit in rats.** Levine JD, Strauss LR, Muenz LR, Dratman
MB, Stewart KT, Adler NT.

Neuroscience. 2000;101(2):283-7. **Nitric oxide synthase inhibitors unmask
acetylcholine-mediated constriction of cerebral vessels in the in vitro
isolated guinea-pig brain.** Librizzi L, Folco G, de Curtis M.

J Neurotrauma. 1992 May;9 Suppl 2:S463-74. **Cholinergic and opioid mediation
of traumatic brain injury.** Lyeth BG, Hayes RL.

Neurosci Behav Physiol. 2010 Sep;40(7):737-43. **Prevention of
neurodegenerative damage to the brain in rats in experimental Alzheimer's
disease by adaptation to hypoxia.** Manukhina EB, Goryacheva AV, Barskov IV,
Viktorov IV, Guseva AA, Pshennikova MG, Khomenko IP, Mashina SY, Pokidyshev
DA, Malyshev IY.

Eur J Pharmacol. 1987 Feb 24;134(3):345-8. **Triiodothyroacetic acid-induced
reversal of learned helplessness in rats.** Massol J, Martin P, Soubrié P,
Simon P.

Eur J Pharmacol. 1988 Aug 2;152(3):347-51. **Triiodothyroacetic acid (TRIAC)
potentiation of antidepressant-induced reversal of learned helplessness in
rats.** Massol J, Martin P, Soubrié P, Puech AJ.

J Neurosci. 2013 Jul 31;33(31):12557-12568. **Nitric Oxide Mediates Selective
Degeneration of Hypothalamic Orexin Neurons through Dysfunction of Protein
Disulfide Isomerase.** Obukuro K, Nobunaga M, Takigawa M, Morioka H, Hisatsune
A, Isohama Y, Shimokawa H, Tsutsui M, Katsuki H.

Neurology. 2011 Mar 22;76(12):1046-50. **Cholinergic dysfunction after
traumatic brain injury: preliminary findings from a PET study.** Östberg A,
Virta J, Rinne JO, Oikonen V, Luoto P, Någren K, Arponen E, Tenovuo O.

1\. Eur J Neurosci. 2013 Jan;37(2):181-9. **Regulation of acetylcholinesterase
activity by nitric oxide in rat neuromuscular junction via N-methyl-D-
aspartate receptor activation.** Petrov KA, Malomouzh AI, Kovyazina IV, Krejci
E, Nikitashina AD, Proskurina SE, Zobov VV, Nikolsky EE.

Brain Res. 2005 Jul 5;1049(1):112-9. **Progesterone treatment inhibits the
inflammatory agents that accompany traumatic brain injury.** Pettus EH, Wright
DW, Stein DG, Hoffman SW.

J Neurotrauma. 1997 Dec;14(12):897-905. **Effect of tetrahydroaminoacridine, a
cholinesterase inhibitor, on cognitive performance following experimental
brain injury.** Pike BR, Hamm RJ, Temple MD, Buck DL, Lyeth BG.

Psychosom Med. 1957 May-Jun;19(3):191-8. **On the phenomenon of sudden death
in animals and man.** Richter CP.

Psychosom Med. 1976 Jan-Feb;38(1):55-8. **Sudden death in the laboratory
rat.** Rosellini RA, Binik YM, Seligman MP.

J Neurosurg. 1954 Jan;11(1):77-83. **The use of cholinergic blocking agents in
the treatment of cranio-cerebral injuries.** RUGE D.

J Neurosurg. 1950 Sep;7(5):398-402. **Atropine in the treatment of closed head
injury.**

WARD A Jr.

Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Aug 3. pii: S0041-008X(13)00326-8. **Arsenic
toxicity induced endothelial dysfunction and dementia: Pharmacological
interdiction by histone deacetylase and inducible nitric oxide synthase
inhibitors.** Sharma B, Sharma PM.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2013 Feb;103(4):821-30. **Pharmacological inhibition
of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase, convalesce behavior and biochemistry
of hypertension induced vascular dementia in rats.** Sharma B, Singh N.

J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1973 Aug;36(4):581-4. **Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease treated with amantidine. A report of two cases.** Sanders WL, Dunn TL.

Neuroscientist. 2010 Aug;16(4):435-52. **Nitric oxide signaling in brain
function, dysfunction, and dementia.** Steinert JR, Chernova T, Forsythe ID.

FASEB J. 2001 Jun;15(8):1407-9. **Amyloid beta-peptide induces nitric oxide
production in rat hippocampus: association with cholinergic dysfunction and
amelioration by inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitors.** Tran MH, Yamada
K, Olariu A, Mizuno M, Ren XH, Nabeshima T.

Genes Nutr. 2009 December; 4(4): 309–314. **Dietary polyunsaturated fatty
acids improve cholinergic transmission in the aged brain** Willis LM, Shukitt-
Hale B, Joseph JA.

Toxicology. 2013 May 10;307:3-11. **Linking pesticide exposure and dementia:
what is the evidence?** Zaganas I, Kapetanaki S, Mastorodemos V, Kanavouras K,
Colosio C, Wilks MF, Tsatsakis AM.

Exp Neurol. 2000 Nov;166(1):136-52. **Postinjury administration of L-deprenyl
improves cognitive function and enhances neuroplasticity after traumatic brain
injury.** Zhu J, Hamm RJ, Reeves TM, Povlishock JT, Phillips LL.

Neurochem Int. 2013 Sep;63(3):172-9. **Chronic social isolation induces NF-κB
activation and upregulation of iNOS protein expression in rat prefrontal
cortex.** ZlatkoviÄ J, FilipoviÄ D.

J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4779-86. **Hypothyroid phenotype is
contributed by mitochondrial complex I inactivation due to translocated
neuronal nitric-oxide synthase.** Franco MC, Antico Arciuch VG, Peralta JG,
Galli S, Levisman D, López LM, Romorini L, Poderoso JJ, Carreras MC.

Laboratory of Oxygen Metabolism, University Hospital, Facultad de Medicina,

University of Buenos Aires, 1120-Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Although transcriptional effects of thyroid hormones have substantial
influence

on oxidative metabolism, **how thyroid sets basal metabolic rate remains
obscure.**

**Compartmental localization of nitric-oxide synthases is important for
nitric**

**oxide signaling. We therefore examined liver neuronal nitric-oxide synthase-
alpha**

**(nNOS) subcellular distribution as a putative mechanism for thyroid effects
on**

**rat metabolic rate. At low 3,3',5-triiodo-L-thyronine levels, nNOS mRNA
increased**

**by 3-fold, protein** expression by one-fold, and nNOS was selectively
translocated

to mitochondria without changes in other isoforms. In contrast, under thyroid

hormone administration, mRNA level did not change and nNOS remained
predominantly

localized in cytosol. In hypothyroidism, nNOS translocation resulted in
enhanced

mitochondrial nitric-oxide synthase activity with low O2 uptake. In this
context,

NO utilization increased active O2 species and peroxynitrite yields and
tyrosine

nitration of complex I proteins that reduced complex activity. Hypothyroidism
was

also associated to high phospho-p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and

decreased phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and cyclin D1
levels.

**Similarly to thyroid hormones, but without changing thyroid status, nitric-
oxide**

**synthase inhibitor N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester increased basal**

**metabolic rate, prevented mitochondrial nitration and complex I derangement,
and**

**turned mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling and cyclin D1 expression
back**

**to control pattern. We surmise that nNOS spatial confinement in mitochondria
is a**

**significant downstream effector of thyroid hormone and hypothyroid
phenotype.**

Toxicology. 2013 May 10;307:3-11. **Linking pesticide exposure and dementia:
what is the evidence?** Zaganas I, Kapetanaki S, Mastorodemos V, Kanavouras K,
Colosio C, Wilks MF, Tsatsakis AM.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000 Oct;295(1):314-20. **Nitric oxide is involved in
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor-induced myopathy in rats.** Jeyarasasingam G,
Yeluashvili M, Quik M.

Neuroreport. 2000 Apr 27;11(6):1173-6. **Tacrine, a reversible
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, induces myopathy.** Jeyarasasingam G,
Yeluashvili M, Quik M.

Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 11;290(1):97-104.

NO synthesis, unlike respiration, influences intracellular oxygen tension.

Coste J, Vial JC, Faury G, Deronzier A, Usson Y, Robert-Nicoud M, Verdetti J.

We have developed a new phosphorescent probe, PdTCPPNa(4), whose luminescence
properties are affected by local variations of intracellular oxygen tension
(PO(2)). Spectrofluorometric measurements on living human umbilical venous
endothelial cells loaded with this molecule show that a decrease in
extracellular oxygen tension induces a decrease of PO(2), illustrating the
phenomenon of oxygen diffusion and validating the use of this probe in living
cells. Moreover, KCN- or 2,4-dinitrophenol-induced modifications of
respiration do not lead to detectable PO(2) variations, probably because O(2)
diffusion is sufficient to allow oxygen supply. On the contrary, **activation
by acetylcholine or endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), which produces
NO while consuming oxygen, induces a significant decrease in PO(2), whose
amplitude is dependent on the acetylcholine dose, i.e., the eNOS activity
level.** Hence, activated cytosolic enzymes could consume high levels of
oxygen which cannot be supplied by diffusion, leading to PO(2) decrease. Other
cell physiology mechanisms leading to PO(2) variations can now be studied in
living cells with this probe.

Science. 1984 Jan 6;223(4631):61-3. **Coexistence of acetylcholinesterase and
somatostatin-immunoreactivity in neurons cultured from rat cerebrum.** Delfs
JR, Zhu CH, Dichter MA.

Genes Nutr. 2009 December; 4(4): 309–314. **Dietary polyunsaturated fatty
acids improve cholinergic transmission in the aged brain** Willis LM, Shukitt-
Hale B, Joseph JA.

Toxicology. 2013 May 10;307:3-11. Linking pesticide exposure and dementia:
what is the evidence? Zaganas I, Kapetanaki S, Mastorodemos V, Kanavouras K,
Colosio C, Wilks MF,

Tsatsakis AM.

s sufficient for oxidative phosphorylation (references in ref. 1). These
findings indicate that, in execution of these tasks, the involved brain tissue
switches to aerobic glycolysis.

Acta Neurochir Suppl. 1997;70:130-3. Topical application of insulin like
growth factor-1 reduces edema and upregulation of neuronal nitric oxide
synthase following trauma to the rat spinal cord. Sharma HS, Nyberg F, Gordh
T, Alm P, Westman J.

Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Aug 3. pii: S0041-008X(13)00326-8. **Arsenic
toxicity induced endothelial dysfunction and dementia: Pharmacological
interdiction by histone deacetylase and inducible nitric oxide synthase
inhibitors.** Sharma B, Sharma PM.

2\. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2013 Feb;103(4):821-30. **Pharmacological
inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase, convalesce behavior and biochemistry
of hypertension induced vascular dementia in rats.** Sharma B, Singh N.

CNS and CVS Research Lab., Pharmacology Division, Department of Pharmaceutical

Sciences and Drug Research, Faculty of Medicine, Punjabi University, Patiala

147002, Punjab, India.
[bhupeshresearch@gmail.com](mailto:bhupeshresearch@gmail.com)

Cognitive disorders are likely to increase over the coming years (5-10).
Vascular

dementia (VaD) has heterogeneous pathology and is a challenge for clinicians.

Current Alzheimer's disease drugs have had limited clinical efficacy in
treating

VaD and none have been approved by major regulatory authorities specifically
for

this disease. Role of iNOS and NADPH-oxidase has been reported in various

pathological conditions but there role in hypertension (Hypt) induced VaD is

still unclear. This research work investigates the salutiferous effect of

aminoguanidine (AG), an iNOS inhibitor and 4'-hydroxy-3'-methoxyacetophenone

(HMAP), a NADPH oxidase inhibitor in Hypt induced VaD in rats.

Deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt (DOCA-S) hypertension has been used for

development of VaD in rats. Morris water-maze was used for testing learning
and

memory. Vascular system assessment was done by testing endothelial function.
Mean

arterial blood pressure (MABP), oxidative stress [aortic superoxide anion,
serum

and brain thiobarbituric acid reactive species (TBARS) and brain glutathione

(GSH)], nitric oxide levels (serum nitrite/nitrate) and cholinergic activity

(brain acetyl cholinesterase activity-AChE) were also measured. DOCA-S treated

rats have shown increased MABP with impairment of endothelial function,
learning

and memory, reduction in serum nitrite/nitrate & brain GSH levels along with

increase in serum & brain TBARS, and brain AChE activity. AG as well as HMAP

significantly convalesce Hypt induced impairment of learning, memory,
endothelial

function, and alterations in various biochemical parameters. It may be
concluded

that AG, an iNOS inhibitor and HMAP, a NADPH-oxidase inhibitor may be
considered

as potential agents for the management of Hypt induced VaD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

[Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16(25):2837-50. Nitric oxide: target for therapeutic
strategies in Alzheimer's disease. Fernandez AP, Pozo-Rodrigalvarez A, Serrano
J, Martinez-Murillo R. " **data implicating nitric oxide (NO) in the
progression of the disease. The three isoforms of the NO-synthesizing enzyme
(NOS) operate as central mediators of amyloid beta-peptide (Aβ) action, giving
rise to elevated levels of NO that contributes to the maintenance, self-
perpetuation and progression of the disease.** "]

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2007 Apr;66(4):272-83. Nitric oxide synthase
3-mediated neurodegeneration after intracerebral gene delivery. de la Monte
SM, Jhaveri A, Maron BA, Wands JR. " **increased nitric oxide synthase 3
(NOS3) expression correlates with apoptosis in cortical neurons and
colocalizes with amyloid precursor protein (APP)-amyloid beta (Abeta) deposits
in the brain."**

Neuroscience. 2000;101(2):283-7. **Nitric oxide synthase inhibitors unmask
acetylcholine-mediated constriction of cerebral vessels in the in vitro
isolated guinea-pig brain.** Librizzi L, Folco G, de Curtis M.

Pharmacology. 2000 Feb;60(2):82-9. Choline is a full agonist in inducing
activation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase via the muscarinic M1 receptor.
Carriere JL, El-Fakahany EE.

Glia. 2003 Jan 15;41(2):207-11. Alzheimer's disease is associated with a
selective increase in alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor immunoreactivity
in astrocytes. Teaktong T, Graham A, Court J, Perry R, Jaros E, Johnson M,
Hall R, Perry E.

16\. Neuroscientist. 2010 Aug;16(4):435-52.

**Nitric oxide signaling in brain function, dysfunction, and dementia.**

Steinert JR, Chernova T, Forsythe ID.

Neurotoxicity at the Synaptic Interface, MRC Toxicology Unit, University of

Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Nitric oxide (NO) is an important signaling molecule that is widely used in
the

nervous system. With recognition of its roles in synaptic plasticity (long-
term

potentiation, LTP; long-term depression, LTD) and elucidation of

calcium-dependent, NMDAR-mediated activation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase

(nNOS), numerous molecular and pharmacological tools have been used to explore

the physiology and pathological consequences for nitrergic signaling. In this

review, the authors summarize the current understanding of this subtle
signaling

pathway, discuss the evidence for nitrergic modulation of ion channels and

homeostatic modulation of intrinsic excitability, and speculate about the

pathological consequences of spillover between different nitrergic
compartments

in contributing to aberrant signaling in neurodegenerative disorders.

Accumulating evidence points to various ion channels and particularly

voltage-gated potassium channels as signaling targets, whereby NO mediates

activity-dependent control of intrinsic neuronal excitability; such changes
could

underlie broader mechanisms of synaptic plasticity across neuronal networks.
In

addition, **the inability to constrain NO diffusion suggests that spillover
from**

**endothelium (eNOS) and/or immune compartments (iNOS) into the nervous
system**

**provides potential pathological sources of NO and where control failure in
these**

**other systems could have broader neurological implications.** Abnormal NO
signaling

could therefore contribute to a variety of neurodegenerative pathologies such
as

stroke/excitotoxicity, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, and
Parkinson's

disease.

Neurosci Bull. 2011 Dec;27(6):366-82. Nitric oxide in neurodegeneration:
potential benefits of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories. Doherty GH.18.

Neuroscience. 2010 Dec 15;171(3):859-68. Low energy laser light (632.8 nm)
suppresses amyloid-β peptide-induced oxidative and inflammatory responses in
astrocytes.

Yang X, Askarova S, Sheng W, Chen JK, Sun AY, Sun GY, Yao G, Lee JC.

Neurosci Behav Physiol. 2010 Sep;40(7):737-43. **Prevention of
neurodegenerative damage to the brain in rats in experimental Alzheimer's
disease by adaptation to hypoxia.** Manukhina EB, Goryacheva AV, Barskov IV,
Viktorov IV, Guseva AA, Pshennikova MG, Khomenko IP, Mashina SY, Pokidyshev
DA, Malyshev IY.

Physiol Behav. 1990 Jul;48(1):165-7.

**Thyroparathyroidectomy produces a progressive escape deficit in rats.**

Levine JD, Strauss LR, Muenz LR, Dratman MB, Stewart KT, Adler NT.

Department of Anatomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

Abnormal thyroid status and affective disorders have been associated in the
human

clinical literature. It has recently been shown **that pretreatment with
thyroid**

**hormone can prevent escape deficits produced by inescapable shock in an
animal**

**analogue of depression.** In this report we provide evidence that
**hypothyroid**

**status can produce an escape deficit in rats.** While sham-operated rats
improved

their performance on a simple escape task over three days of testing,

thyroparathyroidectomized rats showed a pronounced decrease in their
responses.

Markov transition analysis was used to obtain conditional probabilities of

escaping given a prior escape or failure to escape for the two groups. This

analysis shows that the structure of the data set may be similar for the two

groups. These results suggest that if intact rats learn to escape, then

hypothyroid rats may learn not to escape.

1\. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1990 Aug;36(4):775-8.

**Bright light blocks the capacity of inescapable swim stress to
supersensitize a**

**central muscarinic mechanism.**

Flemmer DD, Dilsaver SC, Peck JA.

Department of Psychiatry, Ohio State University.

Clinical and basic researchers have proposed that muscarinic cholinergic

mechanisms mediate some effects of chronic stress. Chronic inescapable
(forced)

swim stress depletes brain biogenic amines and is used to produce learned

helplessness in rats. Behavioral and biochemical characteristics of animals in

the state of learned helplessness lead some investigators to believe this

condition provides a useful animal model of depression. **Inescapable swim
stress**

**also produces supersensitivity to the hypothermic effect of the muscarinic**

**agonist oxotremorine in the rat.** The authors previously demonstrated that
bright

light potently induces subsensitivity of a central muscarinic mechanism
involved

in the regulation of core temperature under a variety of circumstances. They
now

report using a repeated measures design that inescapable swim stress of five
days

duration produces supersensitivity to oxotremorine (increase in thermic
response

of 405%). This **supersensitivity is reversed within five days by treatment
with**

**bright light, despite continuation of daily swim stress. Daily inescapable
swim**

**stress was continued beyond cessation of treatment with bright light.** Five
days

later, supersensitivity to the hypothermic effect of oxotremorine was once
again

evident.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1986 Aug;25(2):415-21.

Neurochemical and behavioral consequences of mild, uncontrollable shock:
effects

of PCPA.

Edwards E, Johnson J, Anderson D, Turano P, Henn FA.

The present experiments examined the role of the serotonergic system in the

behavioral deficit produced by uncontrollable shock. In Experiment 1:

Establishment of model, the behavioral potential of the Sprague-Dawley rat was

defined. When exposed to mild uncontrollable stress such as a 0.8 mA electric

footshock, a significant percentage of rats developed a shock escape deficit

which was evident when subsequently placed in a shock escape paradigm.
Serotonin

depletion was produced by chronic treatment with p-chlorophenylalanine.
Biogenic

amine levels and 5-HT levels were monitored in various brain areas using HPLC.

Following chronic treatment with PCPA, the shock escape capability of the

Sprague-Dawley rat was assessed. **The severe depletion of 5-HT in various
brain**

**regions was highly correlated with a dramatic improvement in the shock
escape**

**scores. Thus, the detrimental effects of exposure to a mild course of
inescapable**

**shock can be prevented by chronic treatment with PCPA**. These experiments

implicate the serotonergic system as a possible mediator of the "learned

helplessness" phenomenon.

Biol Psychiatry. 1985 Sep;20(9):1023-5.

Triiodothyronine-induced reversal of learned helplessness in rats.

Martin P, Brochet D, Soubrie P, Simon P.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1982 Nov;17(5):877-83.

Evidence for a serotonergic mechanism of the learned helplessness phenomenon.

Brown L, Rosellini RA, Samuels OB, Riley EP.

The present experiments examined the role of the serotonergic system in the

learned helplessness phenomenon. In Experiment 1, a 200 mg/kg dose of

1-tryptophan injected 30 min prior to testing disrupted acquisition of Fixed

Ratio 2 shuttle escape behavior. In Experiment 2, a 100 mg/kg dose of 5-HTP

produced interference with the acquisition of the escape response.
Furthermore,

this interference was prevented by treatment with the serotonergic antagonist

methysergide. In Experiment 3, animals were pretreated with a subeffective
dose

of 1-tryptophan in combination with subeffective exposure to inescapable
shock.

These animals showed a deficit in the acquisition of FR-2 shuttle escape. In

Experiment 4, combined exposure to a subeffective dose of 5-HTP and
inescapable

shock (40 trials) resulted in an acquisition deficit. This deficit was
reversed

by methysergide. Experiment 5 showed that the detrimental effects of exposure
to

prolonged (80 trials) of inescapable shock can be prevented by treatment with

methysergide. These studies implicate the serotonergic system as a possible

mediator of the learned helplessness phenomenon.

45\. Med Hypotheses. 2004;63(2):308-21. Brain cholinesterases: II. The
molecular and cellular basis of Alzheimer's disease. Shen ZX.

2436 Rhode Island Avenue #3, Golden valley, MN 55427-5011, USA.

[zhengxshen@yahoo.com](mailto:zhengxshen@yahoo.com)

Currently available evidence demonstrates that cholinesterases (ChEs), owing
to

their powerful enzymatic and non-catalytic actions, unusually strong

electrostatics, and **exceptionally ubiquitous presence and redundancy in
their**

**capacity as the connector, the organizer and the safeguard of the brain,**
play

fundamental role(s) in the well-being of cells, tissues, animal and human
lives,

while they present themselves adequately in quality and quantity. The
widespread

intracellular and extracellular membrane networks of ChEs in the brain are
also

subject to various insults, such as aging, gene anomalies, environmental
hazards,

head trauma, excessive oxidative stress, imbalances and/or deficits of organic

constituents. The loss and the alteration of ChEs on the outer surface
membranous

network may initiate the formation of extracellular senile plaques and induce
an

outside-in cascade of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The alteration in ChEs on the

intracellular compartments membranous network may give rise to the development
of

intracellular neurofibrillary tangles and induce an inside-out cascade of AD.
The

abnormal patterns of glycosylation and configuration changes in ChEs may be

reflecting their impaired metabolism at the molecular and cellular level and

causing the enzymatic and pharmacodynamical modifications and neurotoxicity

detected in brain tissue and/or CSF of patients with AD and in specimens in

laboratory experiments. The inflammatory reactions mainly arising from

ChEs-containing neuroglial cells may facilitate the pathophysiologic process
of

AD. It is proposed that brain ChEs may serve as a central point rallying
various

hypotheses regarding the etio-pathogenesis of AD.

3\. Neurology. 2011 Mar 22;76(12):1046-50. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318211c1c4.

Cholinergic dysfunction after traumatic brain injury: preliminary findings
from a

PET study.

Östberg A, Virta J, Rinne JO, Oikonen V, Luoto P, Någren K, Arponen E, Tenovuo
O.

Department of Neurology, University of Turku and Turku University Central

Hospital, Turku, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: There is evidence that the cholinergic system is frequently
involved

in the cognitive consequences of traumatic brain injury (TBI). We studied
whether

the brain cholinergic function is altered after TBI in vivo using PET.

METHODS: Cholinergic function was assessed with

[methyl-(11)C]N-methylpiperidyl-4-acetate, which reflects the

acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity, in 17 subjects more than 1 year after a
TBI

and in 12 healthy controls. All subjects had been without any centrally acting

drugs for at least 4 weeks.

RESULTS: The AChE activity was significantly lower in subjects with TBI
compared

to controls in several areas of the neocortex (-5.9% to -10.8%, p=0.053 to

0.004).

CONCLUSIONS: Patients with chronic cognitive symptoms after TBI show widely

lowered AChE activity across the neocortex.

© 2011 by AAN Enterprises, Inc.

9\. Brain Inj. 2007 Sep;21(10):1031-7.

Alterations of acetylcholinesterase activity after traumatic brain injury in

rats.

Donat CK, Schuhmann MU, Voigt C, Nieber K, Schliebs R, Brust P.

Institute of Interdisciplinary Isotope Research, Permoserstasse 15, 04318

Leipzig, Germany. [donat@iif-leipzig.de](mailto:donat@iif-leipzig.de)

OBJECTIVE: The cholinergic system is highly vulnerable to traumatic brain
injury

(TBI). However, limited information is available to what extent the degrading

enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is involved. The present study addresses
this

question.

METHOD: Thirty-six anaesthetized Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to sham

operation or to TBI using controlled cortical impact (CCI). The AChE activity
was

histochemically determined in frozen brain slices at 2, 24 and 72 hours after

TBI.

RESULTS: High enzyme activity was observed in regions rich in cholinergic

innervation such as the olfactory tubercle, basal forebrain, putamen and
superior

colliculi. **Low activity was found in the cortex, cerebellum and particularly
in**

**the white matter. A decrease of AchE activity (20-35%) was found in the**

**hippocampus and hypothalamus already at 2 hours after TBI.** An increase of

approximately 30% was found in the basal forebrain at 2 and 24 hours. No
changes

occurred at 72 hours.

CONCLUSION: The findings are consistent with impairment of the cholinergic

neurotransmission after TBI and suggest the involvement of the AChE in short-
term

regulatory mechanisms.

35\. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 1990 Jun;68(3):391-4.

Increase of muscarinic receptor following kainic acid lesions of the nucleus

basalis magnocellularis in rat brain: an autoradiographic study.

Katayama S, Kito S, Yamamura Y.

Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hiroshima University School of
Medicine,

Japan.

We observed changes in cholinergic markers in rat brain seven days after

lesioning the nucleus basalis magnocellularis (nbm) with kainic acid. In

histochemical preparations stained for acetylcholinesterase (AChE), **there
was a**

**marked loss of large AChE reactive neurons within and beneath the nbm on
the**

**injected side, and the AChE positive fibers were greatly decreased
particularly**

**in the IV-VI layers of the frontal and parietal cortices ipsilateral to
the**

kainate lesion. Using in vitro receptor autoradiography, we found a
significant

increase (about 25%) in 3H-QNB binding sites in the I-IV layers of the

ipsilateral frontal and parietal cortices (p 0.05, Student's t-test). **The
area**

**with decreased AChE activity** and increased density in 3H-QNB binding sites

corresponded to the innervation of the cholinergic system arising from the
nbm.

The increase of density in 3H-QNB binding sites was considered to reflect the

postsynaptic denervation supersensitivity.

36\. Hum Exp Toxicol. 1992 Nov;11(6):517-23.

Long-term study of brain lesions following soman, in comparison to DFP and

metrazol poisoning.

Kadar T, Cohen G, Sahar R, Alkalai D, Shapira S.

Department of Pharmacology, Israel Institute for Biological Research, Ness-
Ziona,

Israel.

The long-term histopathological effects of acute lethal (95 micrograms kg-1)
and

sublethal (56 micrograms kg-1) doses of soman were studied in rats and were

compared to lesions caused by equipotent doses of either another
cholinesterase

(ChE) inhibitor, DFP (1.8 mg kg-1), or a non-organophosphorus convulsant,

metrazol (100 mg kg-1). Severe toxic signs were noted following one LD50 dose

administration of all the compounds, yet only soman induced brain lesions.

Moreover, even when administered at a sublethal dose (0.5 LD50), soman induced

some histological changes without any clinical signs of intoxication.

Soman-induced brain lesions were assessed quantitatively using a computerized

image analyser. The analysis was carried out for up to 3 months following

administration, and a dynamic pattern of pathology was shown. The cortical

thickness and area of CA1 and CA3 cells declined significantly as early as 1
week

post-exposure. No pathological findings were detected following DFP and
metrazol

administration. It is therefore suggested that brain lesions are not common
for

all ChE inhibitors and that convulsions per se are not the only factor leading
to

brain damage following the administration of soman. The degenerative process

(found also with the sublethal dose of soman) might be due to a secondary
effect,

unrelated to soman's clinical toxicity, but leading to long-term brain
injuries.

42\. J Neurotrauma. 1997 Dec;14(12):897-905. **Effect of
tetrahydroaminoacridine, a cholinesterase inhibitor, on cognitive performance
following experimental brain injury.** Pike BR, Hamm RJ, Temple MD, Buck DL,
Lyeth BG.

Department of Psychology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Medical College of

Virginia, Richmond 23284-2018, USA.

An emerging literature exists in support of deficits in cholinergic

neurotransmission days to weeks following experimental traumatic brain injury

(TBI). In addition, novel cholinomimetic therapeutics have been demonstrated
to

improve cognitive outcome following TBI in rats. We examined the effects of

repeated postinjury administration of a cholinesterase inhibitor,

tetrahydroaminoacridine (THA), on cognitive performance following experimental

TBI. Rats were either injured at a moderate level of central fluid percussion
TBI

(2.1+/-0.1 atm) or were surgically prepared but not delivered a fluid pulse
(sham

injury). Beginning 24 h after TBI or sham injury, rats were injected (IP)
daily

for 15 days with an equal volume (1.0 ml/kg) of either 0.0, 1.0, 3.0, or 9.0

mg/kg THA (TBI: n = 8, 8, 10, and 7, respectively, and Sham: n = 5, 7, 8, 7,

respectively). Cognitive performance was assessed on Days 11-15 after injury
in a

Morris water maze (MWM). **Analysis of maze latencies over days indicated
that**

**chronic administration of THA produced a dose-related impairment in MWM**

**performance in both the injured and sham groups, with the 9.0 mg/kg dose**

**producing the largest deficit. T** he 1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg doses of THA
impaired MWM

performance without affecting swimming speeds. Thus, the results of this

investigation do not support the use of THA as a cholinomimetic therapeutic
for

the treatment of cognitive deficits following TBI.

43\. Toxicol Lett. 1998 Dec 28;102-103:527-33.

Chronic effects of low level exposure to anticholinesterases--a mechanistic

review.

Ray DE.

Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, Leicester, UK.
[der2@le.ac.uk](mailto:der2@le.ac.uk)

High dose exposure to anticholinesterases which results in symptomatic
poisoning

can have lasting consequences due to the trauma of intoxication,
excitotoxicity,

secondary hypoxic damage, and (for some agents) a delayed onset polyneuropathy

(OPIDN). The potential effects of low level exposure are less well defined.
The

most reliable data comes from controlled clinical trials with specific agents.
A

single dose of sarin or repeated doses of metrifonate or mevinphos, have
produced

only transient adverse effects at doses causing substantial
acetylcholinesterase

inhibition. Other data comes from epidemiological surveys. These have often
used

more sensitive indices than the clinical studies, but are less reliable due to

the difficulty of defining exposure and matching control and exposed
populations.

Subtle, mainly cognitive, differences between exposed and non-exposed
populations

are sometimes seen. Low level exposure can cause a reversible down-regulation
of

cholinergic systems, and a range of non-cholinesterase effects that are

structure-specific, and do not always parallel acute toxicity. Novel protein

targets sensitive to low level exposure to some organophosphates are known to

exist in the brain, but their functional significance is not yet understood.

44\. Exp Neurol. 2000 Nov;166(1):136-52.

Postinjury administration of L-deprenyl improves cognitive function and
enhances

neuroplasticity after traumatic brain injury.

Zhu J, Hamm RJ, Reeves TM, Povlishock JT, Phillips LL.

Department of Anatomy, Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, Virginia

23298-0709, USA.

The rat model of combined central fluid percussion traumatic brain injury
(TBI)

and bilateral entorhinal cortical lesion (BEC) produces profound, persistent

cognitive deficits, sequelae associated with human TBI. In contrast to
percussive

TBI alone, this combined injury induces maladaptive hippocampal plasticity.

Recent reports suggest a potential role for dopamine in CNS plasticity after

trauma. We have examined the effect of the dopamine enhancer l-deprenyl on

cognitive function and neuroplasticity following TBI. Rats received fluid

percussion TBI, BEC alone, or combined TBI + BEC lesion and were treated once

daily for 7 days with l-deprenyl, beginning 24 h after TBI alone and 15 min
after

BEC or TBI + BEC. Postinjury motor assessment showed no effect of l-deprenyl

treatment. Cognitive performance was assessed on days 11-15 postinjury and
brains

from the same cases examined for dopamine beta-hydroxylase immunoreactivity

(DBH-IR) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) histochemistry. Significant cognitive

improvement relative to untreated injured cases was observed in both TBI
groups

following l-deprenyl treatment; however, no drug effects were seen with BEC

alone. l-Deprenyl attenuated injury-induced loss in DBH-IR over CA1 and CA3
after

TBI alone. However, after combined TBI + BEC, l-deprenyl was only effective in

protecting CA1 DBH-IR. AChE histostaining in CA3 was significantly elevated
with

l-deprenyl in both injury models. **After TBI + BEC, l-deprenyl also increased
AChE**

**in the dentate molecular layer relative to untreated injured cases. These
results**

**suggest that dopaminergic/noradrenergic enhancement facilitates cognitive**

recovery after brain injury and that noradrenergic fiber integrity is
correlated

with enhanced synaptic plasticity in the injured hippocampus.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

J Neurotrauma. 1992 May;9 Suppl 2:S463-74. **Cholinergic and opioid mediation
of traumatic brain injury.** Lyeth BG, Hayes RL.

Psychosom Med. 1976 Jan-Feb;38(1):55-8. **Sudden death in the laboratory
rat.** Rosellini RA, Binik YM, Seligman MP.

Vulnerability to sudden death was produced in laboratory rats by manipulating

their developmental history. Rats who were reared in isolation died suddenly
when

placed in a stressful swimming situation. Handling of these singly-housed rats

from 25 to 100 days of age potentiated the phenomenon. However, animals who
were

group housed did not die even when they had been previously handled.

J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1973 Aug;36(4):581-4.

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease treated with amantidine. A report of two cases.

Sanders WL, Dunn TL.

The treatment of two cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease with amantidine is
described. The first case made a remarkable initial improvement which was
sustained for two months, but then deteriorated and died. Histological
examination of the brain showed changes consistent with early Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease. The second case which was clinically one of Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease has now been followed for 30 months since the start of treatment and
appears to be cured. It is considered that amantidine has a definite effect in
this disease and it is suggested that its mode of action, though unknown, is
more likely to be metabolic than antiviral.

Free PMC Article

Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1986 Mar;280(1):136-44. Effect of stress and
glucocorticoids on the gastrointestinal cholinergic enzymes. Oriaku ET,
Soliman KF. (Glucocorticoids lower AChE)

Cardiovasc Res. 1990 Apr;24(4):335-9. Sympathectomy alters
acetylcholinesterase expression in adult rat heart. Nyquist Battie C, Moran N.

Harris LW, Garry VF, Jr, Moore RD. Biosynthesis of cholinesterase in rabbit
bone marrow cells in culture. Biochem Pharmacol. 1974 Aug;23(15):2155–2163.

Heller M, Hanahan DJ. Human erythrocyte membrane bound enzyme
acetylcholinesterase. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1972 Jan 17;255(1):251–272.

J Cell Biol. 1976 June 1; 69(3): 638–646. Bartos EM. Properties of growth-
related acetylcholinesterase in a cell line of fibroblastic origin

Behav Brain Res 2000 Jul;112(1-2):33-41

Impaired escape performance and enhanced conditioned fear in rats following

exposure to an uncontrollable stressor are mediated by glutamate and nitric

oxide in the dorsal raphe nucleus.

Grahn RE, Watkins LR, Maier SF.

Department of Psychology, Connecticut College, Box 5275, 270 Mohegan Avenue,

06320-4196, New London, CT 06320-4196, USA.
[regra@conncoll.edu](mailto:regra@conncoll.edu)

Exposure to uncontrollable aversive events produces a variety of behavioral

consequences that do not occur if the aversive event is controllable.

Accumulating evidence suggests that exaggerated excitation of serotonin (5-HT)

neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) is sufficient to cause these same

behaviors, such as poor shuttlebox escape performance and enhanced conditioned

fear that occur 24 h after exposure to inescapable tailshock (IS). The aim of

the present studies was to explore the possibility that N-methyl-D-aspartate

(NMDA) receptor activation and nitric oxide (NO) formation within the DRN
might

be involved in mediating the behavioral consequences of IS. To this end,
either

the NMDA receptor antagonist 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV) or the
nitric

oxide synthase inhibitor Nw-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME), was

microinjected into the DRN before IS or before testing 24 h later. Blocking
NMDA

receptors with APV in the DRN during IS prevented the usual impact of IS on

escape responding and conditioned fear. However, injection of APV at the time
of

testing only reduced these effects. The DRN was shown to be the critical site

mediating blockade of these behavioral changes since injection of APV lateral
to

the DRN did not alter the behavioral consequences of IS. Conversely, L-NAME
was

most effective in reversing the effects of IS when administered at the time of

testing. These results suggest that there is glutamatergic input to the DRN at

the time of IS that produces long-lasting changes in DRN sensitivity. This

plasticity in the DRN is discussed as a possible mechanism by which IS leads
to

changes in escape performance and conditioned fear responding.

and prolonged depression causes shrinkage of this area. The high cortisol
associated with depression is undoubtedly one of the factors causing brain
shrinkage during stress. Cushing's disease, in which the adrenal glands
produce far too much cortisol, causes shrinkage of the brain, and when the
disease is cured by normalizing the level of cortisol, the brain size is
restored.

There are two very different kinds of stress reaction. The best known "fight
or flight reaction" could be called more accurately "struggle to adapt."
Another, less discussed kind, might appear to be a "give up and die or get
depressed" reaction, but it involves many processes that are protective and
adaptive in certain circumstances.

tone and heart rate;

drown easily. The role of acetylcholine, (Anisman, et al., 1981).

A situation of extreme restraint causes very rapid damage to the tissues, with
bleeding ulcers of the stomach and intestine, shrinking of the thymus gland,
and, if the animal survives for a while, atrophy of the brain. (Doi, et al.,
1991; Gatón, et al., 1993)

LH, somatotropin, GH, Ach. caffeine progest

Behav Brain Res. 2012 Mar 17;228(2):294-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.11.036.
Epub

2011 Dec 8.

Parental enrichment and offspring development: modifications to brain,
behavior

and the epigenome.

Mychasiuk R, Zahir S, Schmold N, Ilnytskyy S, Kovalchuk O, Gibb R.

University of Lethbridge, Canadian Centre for Behavioural Neuroscience,
Canada.

[r.mychasiuk@uleth.ca](mailto:r.mychasiuk@uleth.ca)

4\. Biomed Pharmacother. 2012 Jun;66(4):249-55. doi:
10.1016/j.biopha.2011.11.005.

Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Cholinesterase activities and biochemical determinations in patients with

prostate cancer: influence of Gleason score, treatment and bone metastasis.

Battisti V, Bagatini MD, Maders LD, Chiesa J, Santos KF, Gonçalves JF, Abdalla

FH, Battisti IE, Schetinger MR, Morsch VM.

Departamento de Química, Centro de Ciências Naturais e Exatas, Universidade

Federal de Santa Maria, Campus Universitário, 97105-900 Santa Maria, RS,
Brazil.

[battistivanessa@gmail.com](mailto:battistivanessa@gmail.com)

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the sixth most common type of cancer worldwide.

Cholinesterase is well known as having non-cholinergic functions such as
cellular

proliferation and differentiation, suggesting a possible influence of

cholinesterase in tumorogenesis. Thus, the aim of this study was to
investigate

the whole blood acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and plasma butyrylcholinesterase

(BChE) activities and some biochemical parameters in PCa patients. This study
was

performed in 66 PCa patients and 40 control subjects. AChE and BChE activities

were determined in PCa patients and the influence of the Gleason score; bone

metastasis and treatment in the enzyme activities were also verified.

Furthermore, we also analyzed possible biochemical alterations in these
patients.

**AChE and BChE activities decreased in PCa patients in relation to the
control**

**group and various biochemical changes were observed in these patients.
Moreover,**

**Gleason score, metastasis and treatment influenced cholinesterase activities
and**

**biochemical determinations. Our results suggest that cholinesterases
activities**

**and biochemical parameters are altered in PCa. These facts support the idea
that**

**t** he drop in the cholinesterase activity and the consequent increased
amount of

acetylcholine could lead to a cholinergic overstimulation and increase the
cell

proliferation in PCa.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

4\. Biomed Pharmacother. 2012 Jun;66(4):249-55. doi:
10.1016/j.biopha.2011.11.005.

Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Cholinesterase activities and biochemical determinations in patients with

prostate cancer: influence of Gleason score, treatment and bone metastasis.

Battisti V, Bagatini MD, Maders LD, Chiesa J, Santos KF, Gonçalves JF, Abdalla

FH, Battisti IE, Schetinger MR, Morsch VM.

Departamento de Química, Centro de Ciências Naturais e Exatas, Universidade

Federal de Santa Maria, Campus Universitário, 97105-900 Santa Maria, RS,
Brazil.

[battistivanessa@gmail.com](mailto:battistivanessa@gmail.com)

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the sixth most common type of cancer worldwide.

Cholinesterase is well known as having non-cholinergic functions such as
cellular

proliferation and differentiation, suggesting a possible influence of

cholinesterase in tumorogenesis. Thus, the aim of this study was to
investigate

the whole blood acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and plasma butyrylcholinesterase

(BChE) activities and some biochemical parameters in PCa patients. This study
was

performed in 66 PCa patients and 40 control subjects. AChE and BChE activities

were determined in PCa patients and the influence of the Gleason score; bone

metastasis and treatment in the enzyme activities were also verified.

Furthermore, we also analyzed possible biochemical alterations in these
patients.

AChE and BChE activities decreased in PCa patients in relation to the control

group and various biochemical changes were observed in these patients.
Moreover,

Gleason score, metastasis and treatment influenced cholinesterase activities
and

biochemical determinations. Our results suggest that cholinesterases
activities

and biochemical parameters are altered in PCa. These facts support the idea
that

the drop in the cholinesterase activity and the consequent increased amount of

acetylcholine could lead to a cholinergic overstimulation and increase the
cell

proliferation in PCa.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

1\. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 May;28(3):253-4, 262.

[Progesterone exerts neuroprotective effect on hypoxic-ischemic

encephalopathy-induced brain damage via inhibition expression of inducible
nitric

oxide synthase and nitric oxide production].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XY, Li XJ, Li DL, Wang CR, Guo XP.

[wxyinwxyin@163.com](mailto:wxyinwxyin@163.com)

2\. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Oct;79(10):689-96. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22075. Epub 2012
Sep 11.

Roles of cytokines and progesterone in the regulation of the nitric oxide

generating system in bovine luteal endothelial cells.

Yoshioka S, Acosta TJ, Okuda K.

Laboratory of Reproductive Physiology, Graduate School of Natural Science and

Technology, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.

Nitric oxide (NO) produced by luteal endothelial cells (LECs) plays important

roles in regulating corpus luteum (CL) function, yet the local mechanism

regulating NO generation in bovine CL remains unclear. The purpose of the
present

study was to elucidate if tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF), interferon γ (IFNG),

and/or progesterone (P4) play roles in regulating NO generating system in
LECs.

Cultured bovine LECs obtained from the CL at the mid-luteal stage (Days 8-12
of

the cycle) were treated for 24 hr with TNF (2.9 nM), IFNG (2.5 nM), or P4

(0.032-32 µM). NO production was increased by TNF and IFNG, but decreased by
P4

(P < 0.05). TNF and IFNG stimulated the relative steady-state amounts of

inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) mRNA and iNOS protein expression

(P < 0.05), whereas P4 inhibited relative steady-state amounts of iNOS mRNA
and

iNOS protein expression (P < 0.05). In contrast, endothelial nitric oxide

synthase (eNOS) expression was not affected by any treatment. TNF and IFNG

stimulated NOS activity (P < 0.05) and 1400W, a specific inhibitor of iNOS,

reduced NO production stimulated by TNF and IFNG in LECs (P < 0.05) **.
Onapristone,**

**a specific P4 receptor antagonist, blocked the inhibitory effect of P4 on
NO**

production in LECs (P < 0.05). The overall findings suggest that TNF and IFNG

accelerate luteolysis by increasing NO production via stimulation of iNOS

expression and NOS activity in bovine LECs. P4, on the other hand, may act in

maintaining CL function by suppressing iNOS expression in bovine LECs. Mol.

Reprod. Dev. 79: 689-696, 2012. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

3\. J Neurochem. 2012 Jul;122(1):185-95. doi:
10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07753.x.

Progesterone prevents mitochondrial dysfunction in the spinal cord of wobbler

mice.

Deniselle MC, Carreras MC, Garay L, Gargiulo-Monachelli G, Meyer M, Poderoso
JJ,

De Nicola AF.

Laboratory of Neuroendocrine Biochemistry, Instituto de Biologia y Medicina

Experimental-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

In the Wobbler mouse, a mutation of the Vps54 protein increases oxidative
stress

in spinal motoneurons, associated to toxic levels of nitric oxide and

hyperactivity of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). Progesterone neuroprotection has

been reported for several CNS diseases, including the Wobbler mouse

neurodegeneration. In the present study, we analyzed progesterone effects on

mitochondrial-associated parameters of symptomatic Wobbler mice. The
activities

of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I, II-III and IV and protein
levels

of mitochondrial and cytosolic NOS were determined in cervical and lumbar
cords

from control, Wobbler and Wobbler mice receiving a progesterone implant for 18

days. We found a significant reduction of complex I and II-III activities in

mitochondria and increased protein levels of mitochondrial, but not cytosolic

nNOS, in the cervical cord of Wobbler mice. **Progesterone treatment prevented
the**

**reduction of complex I in the cervical region and the increased level of**

**mitochondrial nNOS.** Wobbler motoneurons also showed accumulation of
amyloid

precursor protein immunoreactivity and decreased activity and immunostaining
of

MnSOD. Progesterone treatment avoided these abnormalities. Therefore,

administration of progesterone to clinically afflicted Wobblers (i) prevented
the

abnormal increase of mitochondrial nNOS and normalized respiratory complex I;

(ii) decreased amyloid precursor protein accumulation, a sign of axonal

degeneration, and (iii) increased superoxide dismutation. Thus, progesterone

neuroprotection decreases mitochondriopathy of Wobbler mouse cervical spinal

cord.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for

Neurochemistry.

Comp Biochem Physiol C. 1993 Sep;106(1):125-9. **The role of the
neurotransmitters acetylcholine and noradrenaline in the pathogenesis of
stress ulcers.** Gatón J, Fernández de la Gándara F, Velasco A.

People with Cloninger's "harm avoidance" personality trait, which is closely
associated with serotonin (Hansenne, et al., 1999), are more likely to develop
dementia (Clément, et al., 2010). These observations are consistent with the
stress-susceptibility of people with high serotonin exposure, and to the
effects of cortisol on nerves and glucose-derived energy production.

Jpn J Surg. 1991 Jan;21(1):43-9.

**Participation of the parasympathetic nervous system in the development of**

**activity-stress ulcers.**

Doi K, Iwahashi K, Tsunekawa K.17. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1987 Oct;20(3):265-8.

Adrenergic modulation of gastric stress pathology in rats: a cholinergic link.

Ray A, Sullivan RM, Henke PG.

Department of Psychology, St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish, Nova
Scotia,

Canada.

The effects of some adrenergic drugs were evaluated on cold restraint-induced

gastric ulcers in rats. The beta-adrenergic antagonist, (+/-)-propranolol (1
and

10 mg/kg), as well as the beta-agonist, isoproterenol (0.05 and 0.5 mg/kg)

potentiated the gastric pathology. On the other hand, the alpha-agonist,

clonidine (0.5 mg/kg) attenuated and the alpha-antagonist, yohimbine (1 mg/kg)

aggravated stress ulcer development. The anticholinergic agent, atropine

methylnitrate (1 mg/kg), reduced both the frequency and severity of stress
ulcers

and also antagonized the potentiating effects of (+/-)-propranolol,
isoproterenol

and yohimbine. The results suggest a cholinergic role in the adrenergic

modulation of gastric stress pathology.

Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1981;74(1):81-7.

**Cholinergic influences on escape deficits produced by uncontrollable
stress.**

Anisman H, Glazier SJ, Sklar LS.

A series of experiments assessed the potential role of acetylcholine (ACh) in
the

escape interference produced by inescapable shock. **Treatment with the**

**anticholinesterase, physostigmine, successfully mimicked the effects of**

**inescapable shock.** That is, the drug disrupted performance when escape was

prevented for 6 s on any given trial, thereby necessitating sustained active

responding. When escape was possible upon shock onset, the drug treatment did
not

influence performance. **The centrally acting anticholinergic scopolamine**

**hydrobromide antagonized the effects of physostigmine, and when
administered**

**prior to escape testing antagonized the disruptive effects of previously**

**administered inescapable shock.** In contrast, the peripherally acting agent

scopolamine methylbromide did not influence the effects of these treatments,

suggesting that the effects of physostigmine and inescapable shock involved

central ACh changes. Scopolamine hydrobromide administered prior to
inescapable

shock did not prevent the escape interference from subsequently appearing, but

this effect could not be attributed to state dependence. It was argued that
the

interference of escape following uncontrollable stress was due to non-
associative

motor deficits. Alterations of the escape deficits by scopolamine were due to

elimination of the motor disruption.

Curr Opin Oncol. 2005 Jan;17(1):55-60.

DNA methylation and cancer therapy: new developments and expectations.

Esteller M.

Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO) Madrid,

Spain. [mesteller@cnio.es](mailto:mesteller@cnio.es)

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In addition to having genetic causes, cancer can also be

considered an epigenetic disease. The main epigenetic modification is DNA

methylation, and patterns of aberrant DNA methylation are now recognized to be
a

common hallmark of human tumors. One of the most characteristic features is
the

inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes by CpG-island hypermethylation of the
CpG

islands located in their promoter regions. These sites, among others, are the

targets of DNA-demethylating agents, the promising chemotherapeutic drugs that

are the focus of this article.

RECENT FINDINGS: Four exciting aspects have recently arisen at the forefront
of

the advancements in this field: first, the development of new compounds with

DNA-demethylating capacity that are less toxic (for example, procaine) and may
be

administered orally (for example, zebularine);

Science. 2013 May 10;340(6133):756-9.

**Emergence of individuality in genetically identical mice.**

Freund J, Brandmaier AM, Lewejohann L, Kirste I, Kritzler M, Krüger A, Sachser
N,

Lindenberger U, Kempermann G.

CRTD-DFG Research Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Technische

Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Comment in

Science. 2013 May 10;340(6133):695-6.

Brain plasticity as a neurobiological reflection of individuality is difficult
to

capture in animal models. Inspired by behavioral-genetic investigations of
human

monozygotic twins reared together, we obtained dense longitudinal activity
data

on 40 inbred mice living in one large enriched environment. The exploratory

activity of the mice diverged over time, resulting in increasing individual

differences with advancing age. Individual differences in cumulative roaming

entropy, indicating the active coverage of territory, correlated positively
with

individual differences in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Our results show
that

factors unfolding or emerging during development contribute to individual

differences in structural brain plasticity and behavior. The paradigm
introduced

here serves as an animal model for identifying mechanisms of plasticity

underlying nonshared environmental contributions to individual differences in

behavior.

Neurobiol Aging. 1995 Jul-Aug;16(4):523-30.

Delayed onset of Alzheimer's disease with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory and

histamine H2 blocking drugs.

Breitner JC, Welsh KA, Helms MJ, Gaskell PC, Gau BA, Roses AD, Pericak-Vance
MA,

Saunders AM.

If each opportunity we have to choose expands our curiosity,

we go beyond our inheritance to become something unique but also universal,
that is, more fully human.

J Neurobiol. 1976 Jan;7(1):75-85. Effects of environment on morphology of rat
cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Diamond MC, Ingham CA, Johnson RE, Bennett
EL, Rosenzweig MR.

…

strains of rats. KRECH D, ROSENZWEIG MR, BENNETT EL.…

19\. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1986 Sep;25(3):521-6.

Cholinergic function and memory: extensive inhibition of choline

acetyltransferase fails to impair radial maze performance in rats.

Wenk G, Sweeney J, Hughey D, Carson J, Olton D.

The present study investigated the effects of a potent inhibitor of choline

acetyltransferase (ChAT), BW813U, on the choice accuracy of rats in the radial

arm maze. BW813U (100 mg/kg, IP) produced a rapid (within 1 hour) and
substantial

decrease in ChAT activity throughout the brain, ranging from 66% (hippocampus)
to

80% (caudate nucleus) that lasted up to 5 days. **A single injection (50
mg/kg, IP)**

**into rats with lesions (using ibotenic acid) in the nucleus basalis**

**magnocellularis and medial septal area, decreased ChAT activity by 75% and
60% in**

**the cortex and hippocampus, respectively. Lesioned and unlesioned rats
were**

**trained on the radial arm maze until they reached a criterion level of**

**performance.** Each rat then received an injection of BW813U (50 or 100
mg/kg, IP).

Choice accuracy was not impaired at any time following the injection. The lack
of

effect on performance may be due to 2 possible factors: The radial maze
retention

paradigm chosen may not be sufficiently difficult, or the decrease in

acetylcholine production was not sufficient to affect behavior. Compensation
by

non-cholinergic neural systems might account for the insensitivity of the rats
to

significant cholinergic depletion.

Psychol Aging. 1988 Dec;3(4):399-406.

Genotype-environment interaction in personality development: identical twins
reared apart.

Bergeman CS, Plomin R, McClearn GE, Pedersen NL, Friberg LT.

Center for Developmental and Health Genetics, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park 16802.

The focus of this study is to identify specific genotype-environment (GE)
interactions as they contribute to individual differences in personality in
later life. In behavioral genetics, GE interaction refers to the possibility
that individuals of different genotypes may respond differently to specific
environments. A sample of 99 pairs of identical twins reared apart, whose
average age is 59 years, has been studied as part of the Swedish Adoption/Twin
Study of Aging (SATSA). Hierarchical multiple regression was used to detect
interactions between personality and environmental measures after the main
effects of genotype and environment were removed. Analyses yield evidence for
11 significant interactions that provide the first evidence for GE interaction
in human development using specific environmental measures. Thus, in addition
to the main-effect contributions of heredity and environment, GE interactions
contribute to individual differences in personality as measured in the second
half of the life course.

Wikipedia: **Excitability and inhibition** [[edit
source](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acetylcholine&action=edit&section=8)
|
[editbeta](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acetylcholine&veaction=edit&section=8)]

Acetylcholine also has other effects on neurons. One effect is to cause a slow
[depolarization](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depolarization)[[ _citation
needed_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed) ] by blocking
a tonically active K+  
current, which increases neuronal excitability. Alternatively, acetylcholine
can activate non-specific cation conductances to directly excite
neurons.[[10]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-Haj-
Dahmane-10) An effect upon postsynaptic [M4-muscarinic ACh
receptors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muscarinic_acetylcholine_receptor_M4)
is to open [inward-rectifier potassium ion
channel](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inward-rectifier_potassium_ion_channel)
(Kir) and cause
inhibition.[[11]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
Eggermann-11) The influence of acetylcholine on specific neuron types can be
dependent upon the duration of cholinergic stimulation. For instance,
transient exposure to acetylcholine (up to several seconds) can inhibit
cortical pyramidal neurons via M1 type muscarinic receptors that are linked to
Gq-type G-protein alpha subunits. **M1 receptor activation can induce calcium-
release from intracellular stores, which then activate a calcium-activated
potassium conductance which inhibits** pyramidal neuron
firing.[[12]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
Gulledge1-12) **On the other hand, tonic M1 receptor activation is strongly
excitatory.** Thus, ACh acting at one type of receptor can have multiple
effects on the same postsynaptic neuron, depending on the duration of receptor
activation.[[13]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
Gulledge2-13) Recent experiments in behaving animals have demonstrated that
cortical neurons indeed experience both transient and persistent changes in
local acetylcholine levels during cue-detection
behaviors.[[14]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
Sarter1-14)

In the cerebral cortex, tonic ACh inhibits layer 4 [medium spiny
neurons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medium_spiny_neuron), the main targets
of thalamocortical inputs while exciting[pyramidal
cells](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pyramidal_cell) in layers 2/3 and layer
5.[[11]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-Eggermann-11)
This filters out weak sensory inputs in layer 4 and amplifies inputs that
reach the layers 2/3 and layer L5 excitatory microcircuits. As a result, these
layer-specific effects of ACh might function to improve the signal noise ratio
of cortical
processing.[[11]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
Eggermann-11) At the same time, acetylcholine acts through nicotinic receptors
to excite certain groups of inhibitory interneurons in the cortex, which
further dampen down cortical
activity.[[15]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
Gulledge3-15)

**Role in decision making** [[edit
source](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acetylcholine&action=edit&section=9)
|
[editbeta](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acetylcholine&veaction=edit&section=9)]

One well-supported function of acetylcholine (ACh) in cortex is increased
responsiveness to sensory stimuli, a form of
[attention](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attention).[Phasic](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phasic&action=edit&redlink=1)
increases of ACh during
visual,[[16]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-16)
auditory [[17]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-17) and
somatosensory [[18]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-18)
stimulus presentations have been found to increase the firing rate of neurons
in the corresponding primary sensory cortices. When cholinergic neurons in the
basal forebrain are lesioned, animals' ability to detect visual signals was
robustly and persistently
impaired.[[19]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-19) In
that same study, animals' ability to correctly reject non-target trials was
not impaired, further supporting the interpretation that phasic ACh
facilitates responsiveness to stimuli. Looking at ACh's effect on
thalamocortical connections, a known pathway of sensory information, in vitro
application of cholinergic [agonist](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agonist)
[carbachol](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carbachol) to mouse auditory cortex
enhanced thalamocortical
activity.[[20]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-Hsieh-20)
In addition, Gil et al. (1997) applied a different cholinergic agonist,
[nicotine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicotine), and found that activity was
enhanced at thalamocortical
synapses.[[21]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
Gil-21)This finding provides further evidence for a facilitative role of ACh
in transmission of sensory information from the thalamus to selective regions
of cortex.

An additional suggested function of ACh in cortex is suppression of
intracortical information transmission. Gil et al. (1997) applied the
cholinergic agonist [muscarine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muscarine) to
neocortical layers and found that [excitatory post-synaptic
potentials](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excitatory_post-synaptic_potentials)
between intracortical synapses were
depressed.[[21]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-Gil-21)
In vitro application of cholinergic agonist carbachol to mouse auditory cortex
suppressed intracortical activity as
well.[[20]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-Hsieh-20)
Optical recording with a voltage-sensitive dye in rat visual cortical slices
demonstrated significant suppression in intracortical spread of excitement in
the presence of
ACh.[[22]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-22)

Some forms of learning and plasticity in cortex appear dependent on the
presence of acetylcholine. Bear et al. (1986) found that the typical synaptic
remapping in [striate cortex](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Striate_cortex)
that occurs during [monocular
deprivation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monocular_deprivation) is reduced
when there is a depletion of cholinergic projections to that region of
cortex.[[23]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-23) Kilgard
et al. (1998) found that repeated stimulation of the [basal
forebrain](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basal_forebrain), a primary source of
ACh neurons, paired with presentation of a tone at a specific frequency,
resulted in remapping of the [auditory
cortex](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auditory_cortex) to better suit
processing of that
tone.[[24]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-24)Baskerville
et al. (1996) investigated the role of ACh in [experience-dependent
plasticity](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Experience-
dependent_plasticity&action=edit&redlink=1) by depleting cholinergic inputs to
the [barrel cortex](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barrel_cortex) of
rats.[[25]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-25) The
cholinergic depleted animals had a significantly reduced amount of whisker-
pairing plasticity. Apart from the cortical areas, Crespo et al. (2006) found
that the activation of nicotinic and muscarinic receptors in the [nucleus
accumbens](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nucleus_accumbens) is necessary for
the acquisition of an appetitive
task.[[26]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-
achcorrelation-26)

ACh has been implicated in the reporting of expected uncertainty in the
environment [[27]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-27)
based both on the suggested functions listed above and results recorded while
subjects perform a behavioral cuing task. [Reaction
time](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reaction_time) difference between correctly
cued trials and incorrectly cued trials, **called the cue validity, was found
to vary inversely with ACh** levels in primates with pharmacologically (e.g.
Witte et al., 1997) and surgically (e.g. Voytko et al., 1994) altered levels
of
ACh.[[28]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-28)[[29]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-29)
The result was also found in [Alzheimer's
disease](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alzheimer%27s_disease) patients
(Parasuraman et al., 1992) and smokers after nicotine (an ACh agonist)
consumption.[[30]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-30)[[31]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_note-31)
The inverse covariance is consistent with the interpretation of ACh as
representing expected uncertainty in the environment, further supporting this
claim.

  * **12•.**[ **^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Gulledge1_12-0) Gulledge, AT; Stuart, GJ (2005). "Cholinergic inhibition of neocortical pyramidal neurons". _Journal of Neuroscience_ **25** (44): 10308–20. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2697-05.2005](http://dx.doi.org/10.1523%2FJNEUROSCI.2697-05.2005). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [16267239](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16267239).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Gulledge2_13-0) Gulledge, AT; Bucci, DJ; Zhang, SS; Matsui, M; Yeh, HH (2009). ["M1 Receptors Mediate Cholinergic Modulation of Excitability in Neocortical Pyramidal Neurons"](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2745329). _Journal of Neuroscience_ **29** (31): 9888–902. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1366-09.2009](http://dx.doi.org/10.1523%2FJNEUROSCI.1366-09.2009).[PMC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Central) [2745329](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2745329). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [19657040](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19657040).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Sarter1_14-0) Parikh, V; Kozak, R; Martinez, V; Sarter, M (2007). ["Prefrontal acetylcholine release controls cue detection on multiple time scales"](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2084212). _Neuron_ **56** (1): 141–54. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.025](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.neuron.2007.08.025).[PMC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Central) [2084212](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2084212). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [17920021](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17920021).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Gulledge3_15-0) Gulledge, AT; Park, SB; Kawaguchi, Y; Stuart, GJ (2007). "Heterogeneity of phasic cholinergic signaling in neocortical neurons". _Journal of neurophysiology_ **97** (3): 2215–29. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1152/jn.00493.2006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1152%2Fjn.00493.2006).[PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [17122323](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17122323).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-16) Spehlmann R, Daniels JC, Smathers CC (1971). ["Acetylcholine and the synaptic transmission of specific impulses to the visual cortex"](http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=4324030). _Brain_ **94** (1): 125–38. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1093/brain/94.1.125](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093%2Fbrain%2F94.1.125). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [4324030](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4324030).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-17) Foote SL, Freedman R, Oliver AP (March 1975). ["Effects of putative neurotransmitters on neuronal activity in monkey auditory cortex"](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0006-8993\(75\)90699-X). _Brain Res._ **86** (2): 229–42. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1016/0006-8993(75)90699-X](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2F0006-8993%2875%2990699-X).[PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [234774](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/234774).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-18) Stone TW (September 1972). ["Cholinergic mechanisms in the rat somatosensory cerebral cortex"](http://www.jphysiol.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=5074408). _J. Physiol. (Lond.)_ **225** (2): 485–99. [PMC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Central) [1331117](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1331117). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [5074408](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5074408).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-19) McGaughy J, Kaiser T, Sarter M (April 1996). ["Behavioral vigilance following infusions of 192 IgG-saporin into the basal forebrain: selectivity of the behavioral impairment and relation to cortical AChE-positive fiber density"](http://content.apa.org/pubmed/bne/110/2/247). _Behav. Neurosci._ **110** (2): 247–65.[doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1037/0735-7044.110.2.247](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037%2F0735-7044.110.2.247). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [8731052](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8731052).
  * ^ [**_a_**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Hsieh_20-0) [**_b_**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Hsieh_20-1) Hsieh CY, Cruikshank SJ, Metherate R (October 2000). ["Differential modulation of auditory thalamocortical and intracortical synaptic transmission by cholinergic agonist"](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0006-8993\(00\)02766-9). _Brain Res._ **880** (1–2): 51–64.[doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1016/S0006-8993(00)02766-9](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0006-8993%2800%2902766-9).[PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [11032989](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11032989).
  * ^ [**_a_**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Gil_21-0) [**_b_**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-Gil_21-1) Gil Z, Connors BW, Amitai Y (September 1997). ["Differential regulation of neocortical synapses by neuromodulators and activity"](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0896-6273\(00\)80380-3). _Neuron_ **19** (3): 679–86. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80380-3](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0896-6273%2800%2980380-3).[PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [9331357](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9331357).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-22) Kimura F, Fukuda M, Tsumoto T (October 1999). ["Acetylcholine suppresses the spread of excitation in the visual cortex revealed by optical recording: possible differential effect depending on the source of input"](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/resolve/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=0953-816X&date=1999&volume=11&issue=10&spage=3597). _Eur. J. Neurosci._ **11** (10): 3597–609.[doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1046/j.1460-9568.1999.00779.x](http://dx.doi.org/10.1046%2Fj.1460-9568.1999.00779.x). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [10564367](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10564367).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-23) Bear MF, Singer W (1986). "Modulation of visual cortical plasticity by acetylcholine and noradrenaline". _Nature_ **320** (6058): 172–6.[doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1038/320172a0](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038%2F320172a0). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [3005879](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3005879).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-24) Kilgard MP, Merzenich MM (March 1998). "Cortical map reorganization enabled by nucleus basalis activity". _Science_ **279** (5357): 1714–8. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1126/science.279.5357.1714](http://dx.doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.279.5357.1714). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [9497289](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9497289).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-25) Baskerville KA, Schweitzer JB, Herron P (October 1997). ["Effects of cholinergic depletion on experience-dependent plasticity in the cortex of the rat"](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S030645229700064X). _Neuroscience_ **80** (4): 1159–69. [doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1016/S0306-4522(97)00064-X](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0306-4522%2897%2900064-X). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [9284068](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9284068).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-achcorrelation_26-0) Crespo JA, Sturm K, Saria A, Zernig G (May 2006). ["Activation of muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the nucleus accumbens core is necessary for the acquisition of drug reinforcement"](http://www.jneurosci.org/content/26/22/6004.full). _J. Neurosci._ **26** (22): 6004–10.[doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4494-05.2006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1523%2FJNEUROSCI.4494-05.2006). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [16738243](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16738243).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-27) [Yu & Dayan 2005](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#CITEREFYuDayan2005)
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-28) Witte EA, Marrocco RT (August 1997). ["Alteration of brain noradrenergic activity in rhesus monkeys affects the alerting component of covert orienting"](http://link.springer.de/link/service/journals/00213/bibs/7132004/71320315.htm). _Psychopharmacology (Berl.)_ **132** (4): 315–23.[doi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier):[10.1007/s002130050351](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007%2Fs002130050351). [PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [9298508](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9298508).
  * [**^**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylcholine#cite_ref-29) Voytko ML, Olton DS, Richardson RT, Gorman LK, Tobin JR, Price DL (January 1994). ["Basal forebrain lesions in monkeys disrupt attention but not learning and memory"](http://www.jneurosci.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=8283232). _J. Neurosci._ **14** (1): 167–86.[PMID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PubMed_Identifier) [8283232](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8283232).

1\. Pharmacol Res. 2011 Jun;63(6):525-31.

Endothelin receptor antagonists: potential in Alzheimer's disease.

Palmer J, Love S.

Dementia Research Group, Institute of Clinical Neurosciences, School of
Clinical

Sciences, University of Bristol, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol BS16 1LE, United

Kingdom. [jen.palmer@bristol.ac.uk](mailto:jen.palmer@bristol.ac.uk)

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is believed to be initiated by the accumulation of

neurotoxic forms of Aβ peptide within the brain. AD patients show reduction of

cerebral blood flow (CBF), the extent of the reduction correlating with the

impairment of cognition. **There is evidence that cerebral hypoperfusion
precedes**

**and may even trigger the onset of dementia in AD. Cerebral hypoperfusion
impairs**

**neuronal function, reduces the clearance of Aβ peptide and other toxic**

**metabolites from the brain, and upregulates Aβ production. Studies in
animal**

**models of AD have shown the reduction in CBF to be more than would be
expected**

**for the reduction in neuronal metabolic activity.** Aβ may contribute to the

reduction in CBF in AD, as both Aβââââ and Aβââââ induce
cerebrovascular

dysfunction. Aβââââ acts directly on cerebral arteries to cause
cerebral smooth

muscle cell contraction. Aβââââ causes increased neuronal production
and release

of endothelin-1 (ET-1), a potent vasoconstrictor, and upregulation of

endothelin-converting enzyme-2 (ECE-2), the enzyme which cleaves ET-1 from its

inactive precursor. ET-1 and ECE-2 are also elevated in AD, making it likely
that

upregulation of the ECE-2-ET-1 axis by Aβââââ contributes to the
chronic

reduction of CBF in AD. At present, only a few symptomatic treatment options

exist for AD. The involvement of ET-1 in the pathogenesis of endothelial

dysfunction associated with elevated Aβ indicates the potential for endothelin

receptor antagonists in the treatment of AD. It has already been demonstrated

that the endothelin receptor antagonist bosentan, preserves aortic and carotid

endothelial function in Tg2576 mice, and our findings suggest that endothelin

receptor antagonists may be beneficial in maintaining CBF in AD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova. 1975 Oct;61(10):1466-72.

[Amine receptors in brain vessels].

[Article in Russian]

Edvinsson L, Owman Ch.

Isolated middle cerebral arteries from cats and pial arteries from humans

(obtained during lobe resection) were studied in a sensitive in vitro system

allowing a detailed pharmacological characterization of various amine
receptors

and related dissociation constants. It was found that the adrenergic receptors

comprise contractile (alpha) and dilatory (beta) receptors. **Acetylcholine
induced**

**dilation (at low doses) as well as constriction (at high doses) both
responses**

**being inhibited in a comparative way by atropine.** Experiments with
selective

inhibitors showed the presence of specific histamine H2 (dilatory) receptors;
**at**

**high doses histamine contracted the vessels in a non-specific way.**

**5-Hydroxytryptamine was the most efficient vasoconstrictor agent, and the**

response could be blocked by the serotonin-antagonist, methysergide.

Behav Neurosci. 2007 Jun;121(3):491-500.

Exposure to enriched environment improves spatial learning performances and
enhances cell density **but not choline acetyltransferase activity in the
hippocampus of ventral subicular-lesioned rats.**

Dhanushkodi A, Bindu B, Raju TR, Kutty BM.

Department of NeurophysiologyNational Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences (NIMHANS Deemed University), Bangalore, India.

The authors demonstrated the efficacy of enriched housing conditions in
promoting the behavioral recovery and neuronal survival following subicular
lesion in rats. Chemical lesioning of the ventral subiculum impaired the
spatial learning performances in rats. The lesion also induced a significant
degree of neurodegeneration in the CA1 and CA3 areas of the hippocampus and
entorhinal cortex. Exposure to enriched housing conditions improved the
behavioral performance and partially attenuated the neurodegeneration in the
hippocampus. The choline acetyl transferase (ChAT) activity in the hippocampus
remained unchanged following ventral subicular lesion and also following
exposure to an enriched environment. The study implicates the effectiveness of
activity-dependent neuronal plasticity induced by environmental enrichment in
adulthood following brain insult.

Copyright (c) 2007 APA, all rights reserved.

Horm Behav. 2013 Jul 27. pii: S0018-506X(13)00139-6.

Progesterone and vitamin D: Improvement after traumatic brain injury in
middle-aged rats.

Tang H, Hua F, Wang J, Sayeed I, Wang X, Chen Z, Yousuf S, Atif F, Stein DG.

Department of Emergency Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Progesterone (PROG) and vitamin D hormone (VDH) have both shown promise in
treating traumatic brain injury (TBI). Both modulate apoptosis, inflammation,
oxidative stress, and **excitotoxicity.** We investigated whether 21days of
VDH deficiency would alter cognitive behavior after TBI and whether combined
PROG and VDH would improve behavioral and morphological outcomes more than
either hormone alone in VDH-deficient middle-aged rats given bilateral
contusions of the medial frontal cortex. PROG (16mg/kg) and VDH (5μg/kg) were
injected intraperitoneally 1h post-injury. Eight additional doses of PROG were
injected subcutaneously over 7days post-injury. VDH deficiency itself did not
significantly reduce baseline behavioral functions or aggravate impaired
cognitive outcomes. Combination therapy showed moderate improvement in
preserving spatial and reference memory but was not significantly better than
PROG monotherapy. However, combination therapy significantly reduced neuronal
loss and the proliferation of reactive astrocytes, and showed better efficacy
compared to VDH or PROG alone in preventing MAP-2 degradation. VDH+PROG
combination therapy may attenuate some of the potential long-term, subtle,
pathophysiological consequences of brain injury in older subjects.

© 2013.

KEYWORDS:

Yang, glutamate stimulates DNA repair; methylation of dna during stress,
hydrophobic

Life Sci 1998;62(17-18):1717-21

Induction of inducible nitric oxide synthase and heme oxygenase-1 in

rat glial cells.

Kitamura Y, Matsuoka Y, Nomura Y, Taniguchi T

Department of Neurobiology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Japan.

Recent observations suggest a possible interaction between the nitric oxide
(NO)/NO synthases and carbon monoxide (CO)/heme oxygenases systems. We
examined the effects of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), interferon-gamma (IFN-
gamma), and NO donor such as S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) on
induction of inducible NO synthase (iNOS) and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in mixed
glial cells and in rat hippocampus. In in vitro glial cells, treatment with
LPS induced the expression of 130-kDa iNOS after 6

h, and NO2- accumulation and enhancement of the protein level of 33-kDa HO-1
after 12 h. In addition, treatment with SNAP induced HO-1 expression after 6
h. Although a NOS inhibitor, such as N(G)-nitro-L-arginine (NNA), did not
change LPS-induced iNOS expression, the inhibitor s **uppressed both NO2-
accumulation and the enhancement of HO-1.** Immunocytochemistry showed that
LPS-treatment induced iNOS-immunoreactivity predominantly in microglia, while
this treatment induced HO-1-immunoreactivity in both microglia and astrocytes.
These results suggest that endogenous NO production by iNOS in microglia
causes autocrine- and paracrine-induction of HO-1 protein in microglia

and astrocytes in rat brain.

4\. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1994 Oct;207(1):43-7.

Dietary restriction modulates the norepinephrine content and uptake of the
heart

and cardiac synaptosomes.

Kim SW, Yu BP, Sanderford M, Herlihy JT.

Department of Physiology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San

Antonio 78284.

The present study was designed to examine the effects of long-term dietary

restriction on cardiac sympathetic nerves and neurotransmitter. The food
intake

of male, 6-week-old Fischer 344 rats was reduced to 60% of the intake of
control

rats fed ad libitum. The body and heart weights of rats diet restricted for
4.5

months were less than those of the ad libitum fed animals, while the heart
weight

to body weight ratios were higher **. The norepinephrine (NE) content of
hearts from**

**restricted rats (1073 +/- 84 ng/g wet wt) was higher than controls (774 +/-
38**

**ng/g wet wt), although the total amoun** t of NE per heart was unchanged.
Similarly,

the cardiac synaptosomal P2 fraction from restricted rats possessed a higher
NE

content (24.1 +/- 2.4 ng/mg protein) than the P2 fraction of ad libitum fed

controls (13.7 +/- 1.3 ng/mg protein). The desmethylimipramine-sensitive

norepinephrine uptake of the P2 fraction from restricted rats was
significantly

higher than that of control rats (9.44 +/- 1.33 vs 4.75 +/- 0.35 ng/mg

protein/hr). The NE uptakes of the two groups were similar when uptake was

normalized to endogenous NE levels. These results demonstrate that long-term

dietary restriction affects cardiac sympathetic nerve endings and suggest that

part of the beneficial action of life-long dietary restriction on the age-
related

decline in cardiovascular regulation may be related to changes in cardiac

sympathetic nerves.

Int J Cancer. 1985 Apr 15;35(4):493-7.

Muscarinic cholinergic receptors in pancreatic acinar carcinoma of rat.

Taton G, Delhaye M, Swillens S, Morisset J, Larose L, Longnecker DS, Poirier
GG.

The active enantiomer of tritiated quinuclidinyl benzilate (3H(-)QNB) was used
as

a ligand to evaluate the muscarinic receptors. The 3H(-)QNB binding

characteristics of muscarinic cholinergic receptors obtained from normal and

neoplastic tissues were studied to determine changes in receptor properties

during neoplastic transformation. Saturable and stereospecific binding sites
for

3H(-)QNB are present in homogenates of rat pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The

proportions of high- and low-affinity agonist binding sites are similar for

neoplastic and normal tissues. The density of muscarinic receptors is higher
in

neoplastic (200 femtomoles/mg protein) than in normal pancreatic homogenates
(80

femtomoles/mg protein). The muscarinic binding sites of the neoplastic and
fetal

pancreas show similar KD values which are higher than those observed for
normal

pancreas.

17: Cancer Res. 1986 Nov;46(11):5706-14.

Muscarinic receptor coupling to intracellular calcium release in rat
pancreatic

acinar carcinoma.

Chien JL, Warren JR.

Analysis by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of

cholinergic receptor protein affinity labeled with the muscarinic antagonist

[3H]propylbenzilylcholine mustard revealed a major polypeptide with molecular

weight of 80,000-83,000 in both acinar carcinoma and normal acinar cells of
rat

pancreas. Muscarinic receptor protein is therefore conserved in pancreatic
acinar

carcinoma. A small but significant difference was detected in the affinity of

carcinoma cell receptors (Kd approximately 0.6 nM) and normal cell receptors
(Kd

approximately 0.3 nM) for reversible binding of the muscarinic antagonist
drug,

N-methylscopolamine. In addition, carcinoma cell muscarinic receptors
displayed

homogeneous binding of the agonist drugs carbamylcholine (Kd approximately 31

microM) and oxotremorine (Kd approximately 4 microM), whereas normal cell

receptors demonstrated heterogeneous binding, with a minor receptor population

showing high affinity binding for carbamylcholine (Kd approximately 3 microM)
and

oxotremorine (Kd approximately 160 nM), and a major population showing low

affinity binding for carbamylcholine (Kd approximately 110 microM) and

oxotremorine (Kd approximately 18 microM). Both carcinoma and normal cells

exhibited concentration-dependent carbamylcholine-stimulated increases in

cytosolic free Ca2+, as measured by 45Ca2+ outflux assay and intracellular
quin 2

fluorescence. However, carcinoma cells were observed to be more sensitive to
Ca2+

mobilizing actions of submaximal carbamylcholine concentrations, demonstrating

50% maximal stimulation of intracellular Ca2+ release at a carbamylcholine

concentration (approximately 0.4 microM) approximately one order of magnitude

below that seen for normal cells. These results indicate altered muscarinic

receptor coupling to intracellular Ca2+ release in acinar carcinoma cells,
which

manifests as a single activated receptor state for agonist binding, and
increased

sensitivity of Ca2+ release in response to muscarinic receptor stimulation.

1: Anticancer Drugs. 2008 Aug;19(7):655-71.

Neurotransmission and cancer: implications for prevention and therapy.

Schuller HM.

Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Pathobiology, College of

Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, 2407 River Drive, Knoxville, TN

37996, USA. [hmsch@utk.edu](mailto:hmsch@utk.edu)

Published evidence compiled in this review supports the hypothesis that the

development, progression, and responsiveness to prevention and therapy of the

most common human cancers is strongly influenced, if not entirely
orchestrated,

by an imbalance in stimulatory and inhibitory neurotransmission. The

neurotransmitters acetylcholine, adrenaline, and noradrenaline of the
autonomic

nervous system act as powerful upstream regulators that orchestrate numerous
cell

and tissue functions, by releasing growth factors, angiogenesis factors and

metastasis factors, arachidonic acid, proinflammatory cytokines, and local

neurotransmitters from cancer cells and their microenvironment. In addition,
they

modulate proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and metastasis of cancer

directly by intracellular signaling downstream of neurotransmitter receptors.

Nicotine and the tobacco-specific nitrosamines have the documented ability to

hyperstimulate neurotransmission by both branches of the autonomic nervous

system. The expression and function of these neurotransmitter pathways are
cell

type specific. Lifestyle, diet, diseases, stress, and pharmacological
treatments

modulate the expression and responsiveness of neurotransmitter pathways.
Current

preclinical testing systems fail to incorporate the modulating effects of

neurotransmission on the responsiveness to anticancer agents and should be

amended accordingly. The neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid has a strong

inhibitory function on sympathicus-driven cancers whereas stimulators of
cyclic

adenosine monophosphate/protein kinase A signaling have strong inhibitory

function on parasympathicus-driven cancers. Marker-guided restoration of the

physiological balance in stimulatory and inhibitory neurotransmission
represents

a promising and hitherto neglected strategy for the prevention and therapy of

neurotransmitter-responsive cancers.

Psychological stress in IBD: new insights into pathogenic and ...

[www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) › Journal List › Gut ›
v.54(10); Oct 2005

by JE Mawdsley - ‎2005 - ‎Cited by 255 - ‎Related articles

Psychological stress has long been reported anecdotally to increase disease
..... atropine and was more marked in cholinesterase deficient Wistar-Kyoto
rats.

Neuropsychopharmacology. 2002 May;26(5):672-81.

Sexual diergism of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal cortical responses to low-
dose

physotigmine in elderly vs. young women and men.

Rubin RT, Rhodes ME, O'Toole S, Czambel RK.

Center for Neurosciences Research, MCP Hahnemann University School of
Medicine,

Allegheny General Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA.
[rubin@wpahs.org](mailto:rubin@wpahs.org)

We previously demonstrated that the reversible cholinesterase inhibitor,

physostigmine (PHYSO), administered to normal young adult women and men
(average

age 35 years) at a dose that produced few or no side effects, resulted in a
sex

difference (sexual diergism) in hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal cortical (HPA)

axis responses: Plasma **ACTH(1-39), cortisol, and arginine vasopressin
(AVP)**

**concentrations increased to a significantly greater extent in the men than
in**

**the women.** To explore the effect of age on these sexually diergic hormone

responses, in the present study we used the same dose of PHYSO (8 microg/kg
IV)

to stimulate ACTH(1-39), cortisol, and AVP secretion in normal elderly,

non-estrogen-replaced women and elderly men (average ages 73 years and 70
years,

respectively). The subjects underwent three test sessions 5-7 days apart:
PHYSO,

saline control, and a second session of PHYSO. Serial blood samples were taken

for hormone analyses before and after pharmacologic challenge.As with the

previously studied younger subjects, PHYSO administration produced no side

effects in about half the elderly subjects and mild side effects in the other

half, with no significant female-male differences. **The hormone responses
were**

**2-5 fold greater in the elderly subjects t** han in the younger subjects,
but in

contrast to the younger subjects, the elderly men did not have significantly

greater hormone responses to PHYSO administration than did the elderly women.

The ACTH(1-39) and AVP responses to PHYSO for the two sessions were

significantly positively correlated in the men (+0.96, +0.91) but not in the

women. None of the hormone responses was significantly correlated with the

presence or absence of side effects in either group of subjects.These results

indicate **a greater sensitivity of the HPA axis to low-dose PHYSO, and a loss
of**

**overall sex differences in hormone responses, in elderly compared with
younger**

**subjects.** The lack of a difference in side effects between the elderly
women and

men and the lack of significant correlations between presence or absence of
side

effects and hormone responses suggest that the increase in hormone responses

with aging is due to correspondingly increased responsiveness of central

cholinergic systems and/or the HPA axis, and not to a nonspecific stress

response.

Horm Behav. 2013 Feb;63(2):284-90.

Progesterone and neuroprotection.

Singh M, Su C.

Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Institute for Aging and
Alzheimer's Disease Research, Center FOR HER, University of North Texas Health
Science Center at Fort Worth, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.
[meharvan.singh@unthsc.edu](mailto:meharvan.singh@unthsc.edu)

Numerous studies aimed at identifying the role of estrogen on the brain have
used the ovariectomized rodent as the experimental model. And while estrogen
intervention in these animals has, at least partially, restored cholinergic,
neurotrophin and cognitive deficits seen in the ovariectomized animal, it is
worth considering that the removal of the ovaries results in the loss of not
only circulating estrogen but of circulating progesterone as well. As such,
the various deficits associated with ovariectomy may be attributed to the loss
of progesterone as well. Similarly, one must also consider the fact that the
human menopause results in the precipitous decline of not just circulating
estrogens, but in circulating progesterone as well and as such, the increased
risk for diseases such as Alzheimer's disease during the postmenopausal period
could also be contributed by this loss of progesterone. In fact, progesterone
has been shown to exert neuroprotective effects, both in cell models, animal
models and in humans. **Here, we review the evidence that supports the
neuroprotective effects of progesterone and discuss the various mechanisms
that are thought to mediate these protective effects.** We also discuss the
receptor pharmacology of progesterone's neuroprotective effects and present a
conceptual model of progesterone action that supports the complementary
effects of membrane-associated and classical intracellular progesterone
receptors. **In addition, we discuss fundamental differences in the
neurobiology of progesterone and the clinically used, synthetic progestin,
medroxyprogesterone acetate that may offer an explanation for the negative
findings of the combined estrogen/progestin arm of the Women's Health
Initiative-Memory Study (WHIMS) and suggest that the type of progestin used
may dictate the outcome of either pre-clinical or clinical studies that
addresses brain function.**

Brain Res. 2005 Jul 5;1049(1):112-9. **Progesterone treatment inhibits the
inflammatory agents that accompany traumatic brain injury.** Pettus EH, Wright
DW, Stein DG, Hoffman SW.

Department of Cell Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Progesterone given after traumatic brain injury (TBI) has been shown to reduce

the initial cytotoxic surge of inflammatory factors. We used Western blot

techniques to analyze how progesterone might affect three inflammation-related

factors common to TBI: complement factor C3 (C3), glial fibrillary acidic

protein (GFAP), and nuclear factor kappa beta (NFkappaB). One hour after

bilateral injury to the medial frontal cortex, adult male rats were given

injections of progesterone (16 mg/kg) for 2 days. Brains were harvested 48 h

post-TBI, proteins were extracted from samples, each of which contained tissue

from both the contused and peri-contused areas, then measured by Western blot

densitometry. Complete C3, GFAP, and NFkappaB p65 were increased in all
injured

animals. However, in animals given progesterone post-TBI, **NFkappaB p65 and
the**

**inflammatory metabolites of C3 (9 kDa and 75 kDa)** were decreased in
comparison

to vehicle-treated animals.

J Leukoc Biol 1996 Mar;59(3):442-50

Progesterone inhibits inducible nitric oxide synthase gene

expression and nitric oxide production in murine

macrophages.

Miller L, Alley EW, Murphy WJ, Russell SW, Hunt JS

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether the female hormones
estradiol-l7 beta (E2) and progesterone (P4) influence inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) and the production of nitric oxide (NO) by interferon-
gamma(IFN-gamma)-and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated mouse macrophages.
Treatment with P4 alone caused a time- and dose-dependent inhibition of NO
production by macrophage cell lines (RAW 264.7, J774) and mouse bone marrow
culture-derived macrophages as assessed by nitrite accumulation. RAW 264.7
cells transiently transfected with an iNOS gene promoter/luciferase reporter-
gene construct that were stimulated with IFN-gamma/LPS in the presence of P4
displayed reduced luciferase activity and NO production. Analysis of RAW 264.7
cells by Northern blot hybridization revealed concurrent P4-mediated reduction
in iNOS mRNA. These observations suggest that P4-mediated inhibition of NO may
be an important gender-based difference within females and males that relates
to macrophage-mediated host defense.

J Reprod Immunol 1997 Nov 15;35(2):87-99

Female steroid hormones regulate production of

pro-inflammatory molecules in uterine leukocytes.

Hunt JS, Miller L, Roby KF, Huang J, Platt JS, DeBrot BL

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City 66160-7400, USA. [jhunt@kumc.edu](mailto:jhunt@kumc.edu)

Estrogens and progesterone could be among the environmental signals that
govern uterine immune cell synthesis of pro-inflammatory substances. In order
to investigate this possibility, we first mapped expression of the inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) genes
in the leukocytes of cycling and pregnant mouse uteri, then tested the ability
of estradiol-17 beta (E2) and progesterone to influence gene expression.
Immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and other experimental
approaches, revealed that the iNOS and TNF-alpha genes are expressed in mouse
uterine mast cells, macrophages and natural killer cells (uNK). Gene
expression in each cell type was noted to be dependent upon stage of the cycle
or stage of gestation, implying potential relationships with levels of female
hormones and state of cell differentiation or activation. Further in vivo and
in vitro experiments showed that individual hormones have cell type-specific
effects on synthesis of iNOS and TNF-alpha that are exerted at the level of
transcription. In uterine mast cells, iNOS and TNF-alpha are promoted by E2
whereas preliminary studies in macrophages suggest that transcription and
translation

of the two genes are unaffected by E2 but are inhibited by progesterone.

Hypothyroidism increases NO; T3, vs helpless; hypothyroid, escape deficit,
Levine, et 1990.

**choline is increased in AD CSF Elble R;, Carriere;**

Genes Nutr. 2009 December; 4(4): 309–314. **Dietary polyunsaturated fatty
acids improve cholinergic transmission in the aged brain** Willis LM, Shukitt-
Hale B, Joseph JA.

28\. Bloj B, Morero RD, Farias RN, Trucco RE (1973) Membrane lipid fatty acids
and regulation of membrane-bound enzymes. Allosteric behaviour of erythrocyte
Mg 2+-ATPase (Na++ K+)-ATPase and acetylcholinesterase from rats fed different
fat-supplemented diets. Biochim Biophys Acta 311:67–79. [PubMed]

29\. Vajreswari A, Narayanareddy K (1992) Effect of dietary fats on
erythrocyte membrane lipid composition and membrane-bound enzyme activities.
Metabolism 41:352–358. [PubMed]

30\. Vajreswari A, Rupalatha M, Rao PS (2002) Effect of altered dietary
n-6-to-n-3 fatty acid ratio on erythrocyte lipid composition and membrane-
bound enzymes. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol 48:365–370. [PubMed]

31\. Foot M, Cruz TF, Clandinin MT (1983) **Effect of dietary lipid on
synaptosomal acetylcholinesterase activity.** Biochem J 211:507–509. [PMC free
article] [PubMed]

33\. Srinivasarao P, Narayanareddy K, Vajreswari A, Rupalatha M, Prakash PS,
Rao P (1997) Influence of dietary fat on the activities of subcellular
membrane-bound enzymes from different regions of the brain. Neuochem Int
31:789–794. [PubMed]

_The protective effect of anticholinergic drugs, such as atropine or
scopolamine, against various degenerative brain processes might lead a person
to wonder whether the Berkeley enrichment experiments might not have been
neurologically exactly the opposite of the stress experiments of Richter and
Seligman, that is, reducing cholinergic processes with enrichment, increasing
them with impoverishment of choices and experience. A drug, pilocarpine,_

USING THE BRAIN FOR LIFE

Living is development; the choices we make create our individuality. If
genetically identical mice grow up in a large and varied environment, small
differences in their experience will affect cell growth in their brains,
leading to large differences in their exploratory behavior as they age
(Freund, et al., 2013). Geneticists used to say that "genes determine our
limits," but this experiment shows that an environment can provide both
limitations and opportunities for expanding the inherited potential. If our
environment restricts our choices, our becoming human is thwarted, the way
rats' potentials weren't discovered when they were kept in the standard little
laboratory boxes. An opportunity to be complexly involved in a complex
environment lets us become more of what we are, more humanly differentiated.

A series of experiments that started at the University of California in 1960
found that rats that lived in larger spaces with various things to explore
were better at learning and solving problems than rats that were raised in the
standard little laboratory cages (Rosenzweig, 1960). Studying their brains,
they found that the enzyme cholinesterase, which destroys the
neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, was increased. They later found that the
offspring of these rats were better learners than their parents, and their
brains contained more cholinesterase. Their brains were also larger, with a
considerable thickening of the cortex, which is considered to be the part
mainly responsible for complex behavior, learning and intelligence.

These processes aren't limited to childhood. For example, London taxi drivers
who learn all the streets in the city develop a larger hippocampus, an area of
the brain involved with memory.

The 1960s research into environmental enrichment coincided with political
changes in the US, but it went against the dominant scientific ideas of the
time. Starting in 1945, the US government had begun a series of projects to
develop techniques of behavior modification or mind control, using drugs,
isolation, deprivation, and torture. In the 1950s, psychiatry often used
lobotomies (about 80,000, before they were generally discontinued in the
1980s) and electroconvulsive "therapy," and university psychologists tortured
animals, often as part of developing techniques for controlling behavior.

The CIA officially phased out their MKultra program in 1967, but that was the
year that Martin Seligman, at the University of Pennsylvania, popularized the
idea of "learned helplessness." He found that when an animal was unable to
escape from torture, even for a very short time, it would often fail to even
try to escape the next time it was tortured.

Seligman's lectures have been attended by psychologists who worked at
Guantanamo, and he recently received a no-bid Pentagon grant of $31,000,000,
to develop a program of "comprehensive soldier fitness," to train marines to
avoid learned helplessness.

Curt Richter already in 1957 had described the "hopelessness" phenomenon in
rats (“a reaction of hopelessness is shown by some wild rats very soon after
being grasped in the hand and prevented from moving. They seem literally to
give up,”) and even how to cure their hopelessness, by allowing them to have
an experience of escaping once (Richter, 1957). Rats which would normally be
able to keep swimming in a tank for two or three days, would often give up and
drown in just a few minutes, after having an experience of "inescapable
stress." Richter made the important discovery that the hearts of the hopeless
rats slowed down before they died, remaining relaxed and filled with blood,
revealing the dominant activity of the vagal nerve, secreting acetylcholine.

The sympathetic nervous system (secreting noradrenaline) accelerates the
heart, and is usually activated in stress, in the "fight or flight" reaction,
but this radically different (parasympathetic) nervous activity hadn't
previously been seen to occur in stressful situations. The parasympathetic,
cholinergic, nervous system had been thought of as inactive during stress, and
activated to regulate processes of digestion, sleep, and repair. Besides the
cholinergic nerves of the parasympathetic system, many nerves of the central
nervous system also secrete acetylcholine, which activates smooth muscles,
skeletal muscles, glands, and other nerves, and also has some inhibitory
effects. The parasympathetic nerves also secrete the enzyme, cholinesterase,
which destroys acetylcholine. However, many other types of cell (red blood
cells, fibroblasts, sympathetic nerves, marrow cells), maybe all cells, can
secrete acetylcholine.

Because cholinergic nerves have been opposed to the sympathetic, adrenergic,
nerves, there has been a tendency to neglect their nerve exciting roles, when
looking at causes of excitotoxicity, or the stress-induced loss of brain
cells. Excessive cholinergic stimulation, however, can contribute to
excitotoxic cell death, for example when it's combined with high cortisol
and/or hypoglycemia.

Drugs that block the stimulating effects of acetylcholine (the
anticholinergics) as well as chemicals that mimic them, such as the
organophosphate insecticides, can impair the ability to think and learn. This
suggested to some people that age-related dementia was the result of the
deterioration of the cholinergic nerves in the brain. Drugs to increase the
stimulating effects of acetylcholine in the brain (by inactivating
cholinesterase) were promoted as treatment for Alzheimer's disease.

Although herbal inhibitors were well known, profitable new drugs, starting
with Tacrine, were put into use. It was soon evident that Tacrine was causing
serious liver damage, but wasn't slowing the rate of mental deterioration.

As the failure of the cholinergic drug Tacrine was becoming commonly known,
another drug, amantadine (later, the similar memantine) was proposed for
combined treatment. In the 1950s, the anticholinergic drug atropine was
proposed a few times for treating dementia,

and amantadine, which was also considered anticholinergic, was proposed for
some mental conditions, including Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (Sanders and Dunn,
1973). It must have seemed odd to propose that an anticholinergic drug be used
to treat a condition that was being so profitably treated with a pro-
cholinergic drug, but memantine came to be classified as an anti-excitatory
"NMDA blocker," to protect the remaining cholinergic nerves, so that both
drugs could be prescribed simultaneously. The added drug seems to have a small
beneficial effect, but there has been no suggestion that this could be the
result of its previously-known anticholinergic effects.

Over the years, some people have suspected that Alzheimer's disease might be
caused partly by a lack of purpose and stimulation in their life, and have
found that meaningful, interesting activity could improve their mental
functioning. Because the idea of a "genetically determined hard-wired" brain
is no longer taught so dogmatically, there is increasing interest in this
therapy for all kinds of brain impairment. The analogy to the Berkeley
enrichment experience is clear, so the association of increasing
cholinesterase activity with improving brain function should be of interest.

The after-effect of poisoning by nerve gas or insecticide has been compared to
the dementia of old age. The anticholinergic drugs are generally recognized
for protecting against those toxins. Traumatic brain injury, even with
improvement in the short term, often starts a long-term degenerative process,
greatly increasing the likelihood of dementia at a later age. A cholinergic
excitotoxic process is known to be involved in the traumatic degeneration of
nerves (Lyeth and Hayes, 1992), and the use of anticholinergic drugs has been
recommended for many years to treat traumatic brain injuries (e.g., Ward,
1950: Ruge, 1954; Hayes, et al., 1986).

In 1976 there was an experiment (Rosellini, et al.) that made an important
link between the enrichment experiments and the learned helplessness
experiments. The control animals in the enrichment experiments were singly
housed, while the others shared a larger enclosure. In the later experiment,
it was found that the rats "who were reared in isolation died suddenly when
placed in a stressful swimming situation," while the group-housed animals were
resistant, effective swimmers. Enrichment and deprivation have very clear
biological meaning, and one is the negation of the other.

The increase of acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme that destroys acetylcholine,
during enrichment, serves to inactivate cholinergic processes. If deprivation
does its harm by increasing the activity of the cholinergic system, we should
expect that a cholinergic drug might substitute for inescapable stress, as a
cause of learned helplessness, and that an anticholinergic drug could cure
learned helplessness. Those tests have been done: "Treatment with the
anticholinesterase, physostigmine, successfully mimicked the effects of

inescapable shock." "The centrally acting anticholinergic scopolamine
hydrobromide antagonized the effects of physostigmine, and when administered
prior to escape testing antagonized the disruptive effects of previously
administered inescapable shock." (Anisman, et al., 1981.)

This kind of experiment would suggest that the anticholinesterase drugs still
being used for Alzheimer's disease treatment aren't biologically helpful. In
an earlier newsletter I discussed the changes of growth hormone, and its
antagonist somatostatin, in association with dementia: Growth hormone
increases, somatostatin decreases. The cholinergic nerves are a major factor
in shifting those hormones in the direction of dementia, and the
anticholinergic drugs tend to increase the ratio of somatostatin to growth
hormone. Somatostatin and cholinesterase have been found to co-exist in single
nerve cells (Delfs, et al., 1984).

Estrogen, which was promoted so intensively as prevention or treatment for
Alzheimer's disease, was finally shown to contribute to its development. One
of the characteristic effects of estrogen is to increase the level of growth
hormone in the blood. This is just one of many ways that estrogen is
associated with cholinergic activation. During pregnancy, it's important for
the uterus not to contract. Cholinergic stimulation causes it to contract; too
much estrogen activates that system, and causes miscarriage if it's excessive.
An important function of progesterone is to keep the uterus relaxed during
pregnancy. In the uterus, and in many other systems, progesterone increases
the activity of cholinesterase, removing the acetylcholine which, under the
influence of estrogen, would cause the uterus to contract.

Progesterone is being used to treat brain injuries, very successfully. It
protects against inflammation, and in an early study, compared to placebo,
lowered mortality by more than half. It's instructive to consider its
anticholinergic role in the uterus, in relation to its brain protective
effects. When the brain is poisoned by an organophosphate insecticide, which
lowers the activity of cholinesterase, seizures are likely to occur, and
treatment with progesterone can prevent those seizures, reversing the
inhibition of the enzyme (and increasing the activity of cholinesterase in
rats that weren't poisoned) (Joshi, et al., 2010). Similar effects of
progesterone on cholinesterase occur in women (Fairbrother, et al., 1989),
implying that this is a general function of progesterone, not just something
to protect pregnancy. Estrogen, with similar generality, decreases the
activity of cholinesterase. DHEA, like progesterone, increases the activity of
cholinesterase, and is brain protective (Aly, et al., 2011).

Brain trauma consistently leads to decreased activity of this enzyme (Östberg,
et al., 2011; Donat, et al., 2007), causing the acetylcholine produced in the
brain to accumulate, with many interesting consequences. In 1997, a group
(Pike, et al.) created brain injuries in rats to test the idea that a
cholinesterase inhibitor would improve their recovery and ability to move
through a maze. They found instead that it reduced the cognitive ability of
both the injured and normal rats. An anticholinergic drug, selegeline
(deprenyl) that is used to treat Parkinson's disease and, informally, as a
mood altering antiaging drug, was found by a different group (Zhu, et al.,
2000) to improve cognitive recovery from brain injuries.

One of acetylcholine's important functions, in the brain as elsewhere, is the
relaxation of blood vessels, and this is done by activating the synthesis of
NO, nitric oxide. (Without NO, acetylcholine constricts blood vessels;
Librizzi, et al., 2000.) The basic control of blood flow in the brain is the
result of the relaxation of the wall of blood vessels in the presence of
carbon dioxide, which is produced in proportion to the rate at which oxygen
and glucose are being metabolically combined by active cells. In the inability
of cells to produce CO2 at a normal rate, nitric oxide synthesis in blood
vessels can cause them to dilate. The mechanism of relaxation by NO is very
different, however, involving the inhibition of mitochondrial energy
production (Barron, et al., 2001). Situations that favor the production and
retention of a larger amount of carbon dioxide in the tissues are likely to
reduce the basic "tone" of the parasympathetic nervous system, as there is
less need for additional vasodilation.

Nitric oxide can diffuse away from the blood vessels, affecting the energy
metabolism of nerve cells (Steinert, et al., 2010). Normally, astrocytes
protect nerve cells from nitric oxide (Chen, et al., 2001), but that function
can be altered, for example by bacterial endotoxin absorbed from the intestine
(Solà, et al., 2002) or by amyloid-beta (Tran, 2001), causing them to produce
nitric oxide themselves.

Nitric oxide is increasingly seen as an important factor in nerve degeneration
(Doherty, 2011). Nitric oxide activates processes (Obukuro, et al., 2013) that
can lead to cell death. Inhibiting the production of nitric oxide protects
against various kinds of dementia (Sharma & Sharma, 2013; Sharma & Singh,
2013). Brain trauma causes a large increase in nitric oxide formation, and
blocking its synthesis improves recovery (Hüttemann, et al., 2008; Gahm, et
al., 2006). Organophosphates increase nitric oxide formation, and the
protective anticholinergic drugs such as atropine reduce it (Chang, et al.,
2001; Kim, et al., 1997). Stress, including fear (Campos, et al., 2013) and
isolation (ZlatkoviÄ and FilipoviÄ, 2013) can activate the formation of
nitric oxide, and various mediators of inflammation also activate it. The
nitric oxide in a person's exhaled breath can be used to diagnose some
diseases, and it probably also reflects the level of their emotional well-
being.

The increase of cholinesterase by enriched living serves to protect tissues
against an accumulation of acetylcholine. The activation of nitric oxide
synthesis by acetylcholine tends to block energy production, and to activate
autolytic or catabolic processes, which are probably involved in the
development of a thinner cerebral cortex in isolated or stressed animals.
Breaking down acetylcholine rapidly, the tissue renewal processes are able to
predominate in the enriched animals.

Environmental conditions that are favorable for respiratory energy production
are protective against learned helplessness and neurodegeneration, and other
biological problems that involve the same mechanisms. Adaptation to high
altitude, which stimulates the formation of new mitochondria and increased
thyroid (T3) activity, has been used for many years to treat neurological
problems, and the effect has been demonstrated in animal experiments
(Manukhina, et al., 2010). Bright light can reverse the cholinergic effects of
inescapable stress (Flemmer, et al., 1990).

During the development of learned helplessness, the T3 level in the blood
decreases (Helmreich, et al., 2006), and removal of the thyroid gland creates
the "escape deficit," while supplementing with thyroid hormone before exposing
the animal inescapable shock prevents its development (Levine, et al., 1990).
After learned helplessness has been created in rats, supplementing with T3
reverses it (Massol, et al., 1987, 1988).

Hypothyroidism and excess cholinergic tone have many similarities, including
increased formation of nitric oxide, so that similar symptoms, such as muscle
inflammation, can be produced by cholinesterase inhibitors such as Tacrine, by
increased nitric oxide, or by simple hypothyroidism (Jeyarasasingam, et al.,
2000; Franco, et al., 2006).

Insecticide exposure has been suspected to be a factor in the increased
incidence of Alzheimer's disease (Zaganas, et al., 2013), but it could be
contributing to many other problems, involving inflammation, edema, and
degeneration. Another important source of organophosphate poisoning is the air
used to pressurize airliners, which can be contaminated with organophosphate
fumes coming from the engine used to compress it.

Possibly the most toxic component of our environment is the way the society
has been designed, to eliminate meaningful choices for most people. In the
experiment of Freund, _et al._ , some mice became more exploratory because of
the choices they made, while others' lives became more routinized and limited.
Our culture reinforces routinized living. In the absence of opportunities to
vary the way you work and live to accord with new knowledge that you gain, the
nutritional, hormonal and physical factors have special importance.

Supplements of thyroid and progesterone are proven to be generally protective
against the cholinergic threats, but there are many other factors that can be
adjusted according to particular needs. Niacinamide, like progesterone,
inhibits the production of nitric oxide, and also like progesterone, it
improves recovery from brain injury (Hoane, et al., 2008). In genetically
altered mice with an Alzheimer's trait, niacinamide corrects the defect
(Green, et al., 2008). Drugs such as atropine and antihistamines can be used
in crisis situations. Bright light, without excess ultraviolet, should be
available every day.

The cholinergic system is much more than a part of the nervous system, and is
involved in cell metabolism and tissue renewal. Most people can benefit from
reducing intake of phosphate, iron, and polyunsaturated fats (which can
inhibit cholinesterase; Willis, et al., 2009), and from choosing foods that
reduce production and absorption of endotoxin. And, obviously, drugs that are
intended to increase the effects of nitric oxide and acetylcholine should be
avoided.

  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2016. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

