![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Diabetes, scleroderma, oils and hormones**  

The basic argument: Stress and aging make cells less responsive in many ways
by damaging their ability to produce energy and to adapt. The polyunsaturated
fats are universally toxic to the energy producing system, and act as a
"misleading signal" channeling cellular adaptation down certain self-defeating
pathways. Diabetes is just one of the "terminal" diseases that can be caused
by the polyunsaturated vegetable oils. Coconut oil, in diabetes as in other
degenerative diseases, is highly protective.  

When the oral contraceptive pill was new (Enovid), it was found to produce
signs of diabetes, including decreased glucose tolerance. Spellacy and Carlson
(1966) suggested that an elevation of circulating free fatty acids might be
responsible, and remarked that "Free fatty acids can block the Krebs cycle,
with relative insulin action resistance resulting." "The potential danger of
the oral contraceptives is one of prolonged pancreatic stimulation." Recent
papers are reporting that the estrogen used to "treat menopause" causes an
increase in free fatty acids. Spellacy and Carlson suggested that estrogen's
effect was mediated by growth hormone, and that is now the consensus. Women
are much more likely than men to develop diabetes.  

Ephraim Racker observed that free unsaturated fatty acids inhibit
mitochondrial respiration, and recent studies are finding that free linoleic
and linolenic acids act as intracellular regulators, stimulating the protein
kinase C (PKC) system, which is also stimulated by estrogen and the (cancer
promoting) phorbol esters. They stimulate the cell while blocking the energy
it needs to respond.  

Scleroderma, or systemic sclerosis, is a supposedly mysterious condition in
which tissues harden, with an excessive deposition of fibrous material.
Besides hardening the skin, it can involve fibrosis of the heart and other
organs, and can cause changes in blood vessels of the kidneys like those seen
in some types of hypertension, and often involves Raynaud's phenomenon and
osteoporosis of the fingers. (Silicone functions as an adjuvant, making
exposure to irritants, solvents or infections more harmful. This seems to be
the reason for the association between breast implants and scleroderma.)
Another type of disease that involves hardening of the skin is scleredema, in
which the skin thickens with an accumulation of "mucin" between collagen
bundles, and in which fibroblasts are overactive in producing collagen.
(Varga, et al.) This condition is believed to often follow a "febrile illness"
and is associated with diabetes. My interest in these conditions comes from my
awareness that estrogen promotes collagen formation, and that changes in the
connective tissue are deeply associated with the processes of stress and
aging, following the ideas of Metchnikov and Selye.  

Many people are still committed to the various old theories of diabetes,
though a few are showing ways in which multiple causes can lead to diabetes.
Increasingly, old age itself is seen to be "like diabetes (Meneilly, et al.;
Smith, et al.), and the situation is ripe for a recentering of our
understanding of diabetes around some of the general facts about aging and
stress.  

Diabetes mellitus, as named, refers to excessive urination and sugary urine,
but it is now often diagnosed in people who neither urinate excessively nor
pass glucose in the urine, on the basis of a high level of glucose in the
blood. Many other signs (abnormal mucopolysaccharide metabolism with
thickening of basement membranes, leakage of albumin through capillary walls
and into the urine, a high level of free fatty acids in the blood,
insensitivity of tissues to insulin, or reduced sensitivity of the beta cells
to glucose) are considered diagnostic by some people, who believe that the
worst aspects of the disease can be prevented if they can diagnose early and
take preventive measures. This attitude derives largely from the genetic
theory of causation, though it incorporates a belief that (environmental)
intervention can ameliorate the course of the disease. When I wrote Nutrition
for Women, I mentioned that the sudden appearance of diabetes in non-European
Jews when they moved to Isreal made the genetic theory of diabetes untenable,
and since then other studies have made the similar point that environmental
factors seem crucial. (Shaltout, et al.) Many people are arguing for the
racial/genetic theory of diabetes, but they are failing to consider some
simple dietary factors, especially the high consumption of unsaturated seed
oils and the combination of nutritional deficiencies and environmental stress.  

I have known adults and children who were diagnosed as diabetic, and given
insulin (and indoctrinated with the idea that they had a terminal degenerative
disease) on the strength of a single test showing excessive glucose. When I
taught at the naturopathic medical school in Portland, I tried to make it
clear that "diabetes" (a term referring to excessive urination) is a function,
and that a high level of glucose in the blood or urine is also a function, and
that the use of insulin should require a greater diagnostic justification than
the use of aspirin for a headache does, because insulin use itself constitutes
a serious health problem. (And we seldom hear the idea that "diabetes" might
have a positive side [Robinson and Johnston], for example that it reduces the
symptoms of asthma [Vianna and Garcialeme], which get worse when insulin is
given. Normal pregnancy can be considered "diabetic" by some definitions based
on blood sugar. I got interested in this when I talked to a healthy "diabetic"
woman who had a two year old child whose IQ must have been over 200, judging
by his spontaneous precocious hobbies. Old gynecologists told me that it was
common knowledge that "diabetic" women had intellectually precocious
children.)  

When non-diabetic apes were given insulin treatments, they developed some of
the same "complications of diabetes" that are seen in humans, and antibodies
to insulin were found in their retinas, suggesting that some "complications of
diabetes" were complications of insulin treatment. Patients were seldom well
informed of the arguments against the use of insulin, but the justification
for the new genetically engineered human insulin is precisely that it avoids
immunological damage.  

Insulin was introduced into medicine in the 1920s. According to the Britannica
Book of the Year for 1947, page 265, "Mortality from diabetes in 1920 in the
United States was 16.0 per 100,000, 14,062 deaths, but in 1944, it was 26.4
per 100,000, 34,948 deaths."

One of the theories of the cause of diabetes is that a virus damages the beta
cells in the pancreas, and the main argument for that in the 1970s was that
the onset of diabetes in children can often be dated to a time shortly after a
severe viral infection. It is true that intense sickness and a high fever (and
high doses of drugs given to treat the sickness) can cause very high levels of
glucose in the blood, and even glucose in the urine, but this is a fairly well
recognized consequence of stress. High doses of cortisone (prednisone, etc.)
typically cause elevated glucose levels. Cushing's syndrome usually involves
hyperglycemia. Normally, this is just a functional response to an excess of
glucocorticoids, but studies in dogs suggested that intense and/or prolonged
stress can damage the insulin-secreting cells in the pancreas. Dogs had half
of their pancreas removed, to increase the burden put on the remaining tissue,
and after a large dose of cortisone the dogs became (and remained) diabetic.  

One of the problems associated with diabetes is the calcification of blood
vessels, though now there is more emphasis on fatty degeneration. Other blood
vessel problems include hypertension, and poor circulation in general, leading
to gangrene of the feet, impotence, and degeneration of the retina. In
muscles, and probably in other tissues of diabetics, capillaries are more
widely spaced, as if the basal oxidative requirement were lower than normal.
However, mitochondria contain more respiratory enzymes, as if to partly
compensate for the poor delivery of oxygen to the cells. Osteoporosis or
osteopenia is a common complication of diabetes, and seems to be associated
with the calcification of soft tissues.  

F. Z. Meerson's description of the stress-injured heart is very similar to the
general changes that occur in chronic diabetes. He found that the stressed
heart becomes rigid and unable to contract completely, or to relax completely.
Excess calcium enters cells, and fatty acids are mobilized both locally and
systemically, and both of these tend to damage the mitochondria. In diabetes,
fatty acids are mobilized and oxidized instead of glucose, and calcium enters
cells, increasing their rigidity and preventing relaxation of muscles in blood
vessels. (I'm not sure whether it is relevant to cell physiology, but the
presence of an excess of free unsaturated fatty acids, and of calcium, in
cells makes me think of the insoluble soap that these substances form in other
situations, including the intestine. It seems that this could form a harmful
deposit in cells, blocking many metabolic processes.)

For many years, histologists have observed that calcium and iron tend to be
deposited together in "devitalized" tissues. Now we know that cell death from
a great variety of causes involves the cell's absorption of increased amounts
of calcium. Simply the lack of energy increases the amount of calcium in a
cell, and stimulation or excitation does the same, creating or exaggerating a
deficiency of energy. In low thyroid people, many (if not all) tissues are
very easily damaged. Since glucose is needed by liver cells to produce the
active (T3) form of thyroid, diabetes almost by definition will produce
hypothyroidism, since in diabetes glucose can't be absorbed efficiently by
cells.  

In the form of cell damage caused by the "excitotoxins," glutamic and aspartic
acids, the damage seems to require both stimulation, and difficulty in
maintaining adequate energy production. This combination leads to both calcium
uptake and lipid peroxidation. When cells are de-energized, they tend to
activate iron by chemical reduction, producing lipid peroxidation. This could
explain the presence of chemically active iron, but an actual increase in the
iron concentration suggests that there has been prolonged injury (oxidative
stress) to the cell, with increased production of the heme group, which binds
iron.  

Hans Selye found that he could produce scleroderma (hardening and
calcification of the skin) in rats by giving them a toxic dose of a heavy
metal, and then irritating the skin a little by plucking hair. Iron is now
tending to be recognized as a factor in inflammation. Vitamin E was able to
prevent the development of scleroderma under Selye's experimental conditions,
suggesting that the irritation allowed the heavy metal to cause oxidative
damage to the skin. Selye found other ways to cause calcification of tissues,
including the walls of arteries, but he directed most of his attention to the
role of "pro-inflammatory" hormones. A decreased blood supply was often used
to predispose an organ to calcification. In diabetes, a characteristic feature
is that the blood supply is relatively remote from cells in muscle and skin,
so the oxygen and nutrients have to diffuse farther than in normal
individuals, and the ATP level of cells is characteristically lower than
normal. In blood cells, both red (Garnier, et al.) and white cells are
probably more rigid in diabetes, because of lower ATP production, and higher
intracellular calcium and sodium.  

Magnesium in the cell is largely associated with ATP, as the complex Mg-ATP.
When ATP is "used" or converted to ADP, this lower-energy substance associates
with calcium, as Ca-ADP. In a hypothyroid state, the energy charge can be
depleted by stress, causing cells to lose magnesium. ATP is less stable when
it isn't complexed with magnesium, so the stress-induced loss of magnesium
makes the cell more susceptible to stress, by acting as a chronic background
stimulation, forcing the cell to replace the ATP which is lost because of its
instability. In this state, the cell takes up an excess of calcium.

The picture that I think explains many of the features of diabetes is that an
energy deficit produces an alarm state, causing increased production of
adrenalin and cortisol. Adrenalin mobilizes fat from storage, and the free
fatty acids create a chronic problem involving 1) blocked ATP production, 2)
activation of the protein kinase C system (increasing tension in blood
vessels), 3) inhibition of thyroid function with its energetic, hormonal, and
tissue-structure consequences, 4) availability of fats for prostaglandin
synthesis, and 5) possibly a direct effect on clot dissolving, besides the
PAI-1 (plasminogen activator inhibitor) effect seen in diabetes (Ceriello, et
al., Udvardy, et al., Vague, et al.). (Estrogen has many pro-clotting effects,
and one of them is a decreased activity of vascular plasminogen activator. K.
E. Miller and S. V. Pizzo, "Venous and arterial thromboembolic disease in
women using oral contraceptives," Am. J. Obst. Gyn. 144, 824, 1982. In 1968,
D. G. Daniel et al., reported that estrogen promotes thromboembolism by
increasing clotting factor IX in the blood.)  

Increased entry of calcium into cells is complexly related to increased
exposure to unsaturated fatty acids, decreased energy, and lipid peroxidation.
Osteoporosis, calcification of soft tissues and high blood pressure are
promoted by multiple stresses, hypothyroidism, and magnesium deficiency. The
particular direction a disease takes--diabetes, scleroderma, lupus,
Alzheimer's, stroke, etc.--probably results from the balance between resources
and demands within a particular organ or system. Calcium overload of cells
can't be avoided by avoiding dietary calcium, because the bones provide a
reservoir from which calcium is easily drawn during stress. (In fact, the
reason calcium can temporarily help prevent muscle cramps seems to be that it
makes magnesium more available to the muscles.)  

If we want to stop a disease that involves abnormal calcification or
contraction of muscle (see Zenere, et al.), we can increase our consumption of
magnesium, and to cause cells to absorb and retain the magnesium, we can
increase our thyroid function. The use of coconut oil provides energy to
stabilize blood sugar while protecting mitochondria and the thyroid system
from the harmful effects of unsaturated fats.  

In 1947, B. A. Houssay found that a diet based on sugar as a source of energy
was more protective against diabetes than a diet based on lard, while the most
protective diet was based on coconut oil. Lard reflects the pigs' diet, and is
usually extremely unsaturated, especially since it became standard to fatten
them on soybeans and corn. Essentially, his study seems to show that
unsaturated (pork) fat permits diabetes to develop, sugar is slightly
protective, and coconut oil is very protective against the form of diabetes
caused by a poison.  

At the same time, A. Lazarow was demonstrating that a low protein diet made
animals more sensitive to diabetes, and that cysteine, glutathione, and
thioglycolic acid (antioxidants) are protective against diabetes. The chelator
of metals, BAL (British anti-lewisite), was also found to protect against
diabetes.  

Taken together, those studies suggest that the oxidizable unsaturated fats are
involved in the process of producing diabetes. At the same time, other studies
were showing that the unsaturated oils suppress the thyroid, and that coconut
oil increases the metabolic rate, apparently by normalizing thyroid function.
Hypothyroidism is known to include deposition of mucopolysaccharides in
tissues, increased permeability of capillaries with leakage of albumin out of
the blood, elevated adrenalin which can lead to increased production of
cortisol, decreased testosterone production, high risk of heart and
circulatory disease, including a tendency to ulceration of the extremities,
and osteoporosis, all of which are recognized "complications of diabetes."
Broda Barnes gave all of his diabetic patients a thyroid supplement, and found
that none of them developed the expected complications of diabetes.

Recently, a high safflower oil diet was found to cause diabetes (Ikemoto, et
al.), and obesity itself is thought to be a factor in developing diabetes. The
hormone patterns associated with obesity can be seen as either cause or effect
of the obesity (or both cause and effect), since, for example, low thyroid can
increase both estrogen and cortisol, which support the formation of fat, and
the fat cells can become a chronic source of estrogen synthesis.  

On a diet lacking the "essential" unsaturated fatty acids, Benhamou (1995)
found that nonobese diabetic mice didn't develop diabetes, that is, the
unsaturated fats themselves, without obesity, are sufficient to cause
diabetes. (Also see Girard; Golay, et al., and Kusunoki, et al.)

Estrogen and the polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), linoleic and linolenic
acid, alike activate the protein kinase C (PKC) system of cellular activation.
Many of the functions of PUFA are similar to the functions of estrogen (e.g.,
antagonism to thyroid function, promotion of age pigment/lipofuscin), so this
information showing that they both act similarly on the same basic regulatory
pathway is important. Estrogen increases secretion of growth hormone (GH; it's
closely associated with prolactin, also increased by estrogen), and GH causes
an increase in free fatty acids in the blood. Estrogen promotes iron
retention, so it sets the stage for oxidative stress. At least in some
systems, both estrogen and PUFA promote the entry of calcium into the cell.  

In diabetes, there is a generalized excess activation of the PKC system. The
starch-based diet, emphasizing grains, beans, nuts, and vegetables, has been
promoted with a variety of justifications. When people are urged to reduce
their fat and sugar consumption, they are told to eat more starch. Starch
stimulates the appetite, promotes fat synthesis by stimulating insulin
secretion, and sometimes increases the growth of bacteria that produce toxins.
It is often associated with allergens, and according to Gerhard Volkheimer,
whole starch grains can be "persorbed" from the intestine directly into the
blood stream where they may block arterioles, causing widely distributed nests
of cell-death. I have heard dietitians urge the use of "complex carbohydrates"
(starch) instead of sugar. In the first physiology lab I took, we fed rats a
large blob of moist cornstarch with a stomach tube, and then after waiting a
few minutes, were told to dissect the rat to find out "how far the starch had
gone." In such a short time, we were surprised to find that not a trace of the
starch could be found. The professor's purpose was to impress us with the
rapidity with which starch is digested and absorbed. Various studies have
demonstrated that starch (composed of pure glucose) raises blood glucose more
quickly than sucrose (half fructose, half glucose) does. The sudden increase
of blood glucose is sometimes thought to contribute to the development of
diabetes, but if it does, it is probably mediated by fat metabolism and the
hormones other than just insulin.  

Brewer's yeast has been used successfully to treat diabetes. In the l930s, my
father had severe diabetes, but after a few weeks of living on brewer's yeast,
he recovered and never had any further evidence of diabetes. Besides its high
B-vitamin and protein content, yeast is an unusual food that should be
sparingly used, because of its high phosphorous/calcium ratio, high potassium
to sodium ratio, and high estrogen content. The insulin-producing beta cells
of the pancreas have estrogen receptors, but I don't know of any new research
investigating this aspect of yeast therapy. In rabbit studies, diabetes
produced by alloxan poisoning, which kills the beta cells, was cured by DHEA
treatment, and beta cells were found to have regenerated in the pancreatic
islets.  

I think the basic anti-aging diet is also the best diet for prevention and
treatment of diabetes, scleroderma, and the various "connective tissue
diseases." This would emphasize high protein, low unsaturated fats, low iron,
and high antioxidant consumption, with a moderate or low starch consumption.
In practice, this means that a major part of the diet should be milk, cheese,
eggs, shellfish, fruits and coconut oil, with vitamin E and salt as the safest
supplements. It should be remembered that amino acids, especially in eggs,
stimulate insulin secretion, and that this can cause hypoglycemia, which in
turn causes cortisol secretion. Eating fruit (or other carbohydrate), coconut
oil, and salt at the same meal will decrease this effect of the protein.
Magnesium carbonate and epsom salts can also be useful and safe supplements,
except when the synthetic material causes an allergic bowel reaction..  

Although I started this newsletter with the thought of discussing the Mead
acids--the unsaturated (n-9) fats that are formed under certain conditions,
especially when the dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids are "deficient"--and
their prostaglandin derivatives as a distinct anti-stress, anti-aging system,
the loss of which makes us highly susceptible to injury, I will save that
argument for a future time, leaving this newsletter as an addition to the view
that an excess of the polyunsaturated fats is central to the development of
degenerative diseases: Cancer, heart disease, arthritis, immunodeficiency,
diabetes, hypertension, osteoporosis, connective tissue disease, and
calcification.  
  

**REFERENCES WITH EXCERPTS AND COMMENTS**  

A. A. Alzaid, et al., "Effects of insulin on plasma magnesium in noninsulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus: Evidence for insulin resistance," J. of Clin.
Endocr. and Metab. 80(4), 1376-1381, 1995. "...insulin resistance in subjects
with NIDDM impairs the ability of insulin to stimulate magnesium as well as
glucose uptake."

A. B. Akella, et al., "Diminished Ca++ sensitivity of skinned cardiac muscle
contractility coincident with troponin T-band shifts in the diabetic rat,"
Circulation Research 76(4), 600-606, 1995.D. A. Antonetti, et al., "Increased
expression of mitochondrial-encoded genes in skeletal muscle of humans with
diabetes mellitus--Rapid publication," J. of Clinical Investigation 95(3),
1383-1388, 1995. "The increased mitochondrial gene expression may contribute
to the increase in mitochondrial respiration observed in uncontrolled
diabetes." (Low ATP with high respiration would suggest uncoupling;
unsaturated fatty acids are known uncouplers of respiration from energy
production.)  

S. Asakuma, et al., "The effects of antianginal drugs on energy expernditure
during exercise in normal subjects," Japanese Circulation Journal--English
Edition 59(3), 137-145, 1995. "RQ (carbohydrate consumption relative to fat
consumption) during exercise was significantly increased and VO2 was decreased
after propranolol, metoprolol and amosulalol." "These data suggest that
propranolol, metoprolol and amosulalol [beta-blockers] increase the efficiency
of energy expenditure during ordinary physical activity by increasing the
utilization of carbohydrate and by decreasing the utilization of fat."

M. Bardicef, et al., "Extracellular and intracellular magnesium depletion in
pregnancy and gestational diabetes," Amer. J. of Obst. and Gyn. 172(3),
1009-1013, 1995.  

P. E. Beales, et al., "Baclofen, a gamma-aminobutyric acid-b receptor agonist,
delays diabetes onset in the non-obese diabetic mouse," Acta Diabetologica
32(1), 53-56, 1995.  

P. Y. Benhamou, et al., :"Essential fatty acid deficiency prevents autoimmune
diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice through a positive impact on antigen-
presenting cells and Th2 lymphocytes," Pancreas 11(1), 26-37, 1995.  

C. D. Berdanier, "Diet, autoimmunity, and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus:
A controversy," Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 209(3), 223-230, 1995. "The
majority of the genetic mutations that result in the phenotypic expression of
the insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus genotype are in the immune system."
Antibodies to milk protein can be found in the patient, but these probably
represent antigen mimicry, resulting from the loss of antibody specificity
which is a feature of autoimmune disease.  

G. Bianchi, et al., "Thyroid volume in type 1 diabetes patients without overt
thyroid disease," Acta Diabetologica 32(1), 49-52, 1995. "An association
between insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (type 1) and thyroid diseases has
long been reported...."  

P. Bjorntorp, "Insulin resistance: The consequence of a neuroendocrine
disturbance?" Int. J. Obes. 19(Suppl. 1), S6-S10, 1995. "The decreased
capillary density may...be of importance for the apparent insulin resistance."  

R. Bouillon, et al., "Influence of age, sex, and insulin on osteoblast
function: Osteoblast dysfunction in diabetes mellitus," J. of Clin. Endocr.
and Metab. 80(4), 1194-1202, 1995\. "...the osteoblast function is
significantly decreased in diabetic patients...."  

A. Ceriello, et al., "The defence against free radicals protects endothelial
cells from hyperglycaemia-induced plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 over-
production," Blood Coagulation & Fibrinolysis 6(2), 133-137, 1995. "The
hypothesis that oxidative stress may play an important role in the
pathogenesis of diabetic complications is ... supported by this study." [GSH
reduced PAI-1.]  

V. Coiro, et al., "Low-dose ovine corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation
test in diabetes mellitus with or without neuropathy," Metabolism--Clinical
and Experimental 44(4), 538-542, 1995. "...basal and CRH-induced cortisol
levels were significantly higher in diabetics than in normal controls."
"...even uncomplicated diabetes mellitus is associated with adrenal
hyperfunction."  

S. R. Colberg, et al., "Skeletal muscle utilization of free fatty acids in
women with visceral obesity," J. Clin. Invest. 95(4), 1846-1853, 1995.
"Visceral obesity is strongly associated with insulin resistance."
"...visceral adiposity is clearly associated with skeletal muscle insulin
resistance but this is not due to glucose-FFA [free fatty acid] substrate
competition. Instead, women with visceral obesity have reduced postabsorptive
FFA utilization by muscle."  

G. A. Colditz, et al., "Weight gain as a risk factor for clinical diabetes
mellitus in women," Annals of Internal Medicine 122(7), 481-486, 1995.

C. Douillet and M. Ciavatti, "Effect of vitamin E treatment on tissue fatty
acids and cholesterol content in experimental diabetes," J. Nutr. Biochem.
6(6), 319-326, 1995. "Diabetes induced a decrease of monounsaturated fatty
acids and particularly palmitoleic acid in all studied tissues: liver, aorta,
plasma." C18:3 n-6 and C20:4 n-6 were increased by diabetes.  

M. Garnier, et al., "Red blood cell sodium conent in NID diabetic patients
with hemorheological abnormalities," Clinical Hemorheology 15(3), 325-333,
1995.  

K. D. Gerbitz, et al., "Mitochondrial diabetes mellitus: A review," BBA--Mol.
Basis Dis. 1271(1), 253-260, 1995\. This particular kind of diabetes, which is
combined with deafness in 60% of the patients, involves a variant
mitochondrial gene and occurs in about 1.5% of diabetics. "The underlying
pathomechanism is probably a delayed insulin secretion due to an impaired
mitochondrial ATP production in consequence of the mtDNA defect." To know the
"causal" value of this gene we have to know how often it occurs in people who
never develop diabetes. It is interesting that it is suggested to operate by
way of impaired ATP production, which can be the result of so many factors,
such as excess unsaturated fats, low thyroid, low magnesium, low copper, etc.
Pages 141-151 of the same journal as an article by D. C. Wallace, et al.,
"Mitochondrial DNA mutations in human degenerative diseases and aging," which
makes the point that "Generally, individuals inheriting these mitochondrial
diseases are relatively normal in early life, develop symptoms during
childhood, mid-life, or old age depending on the severity of the ... mutation;
and then undergo a progressive decline." Their energy-producing systems are
supposedly more susceptible to the effects of aging.  

J. Girard, "Role of free fatty acids in insulin resistance of subjects with
non-insulin-dependent diabetes," Diabetes Metab. 21(2), 79-88, 1995. "Studies
performed in the rat suggest that impaired glucose-induced insulin secretion
could also be related to chronic exposure of pancreatic beta cells to elevated
plasma free fatty acid levels." [This direct effect of free fatty acids on the
beta cells is extremely important. Estrogen--probably via GH--increases free
fatty acids, and adrenalin--which is elevated in hypothyroidism--increases the
release of free fatty acids from storage. Free fatty acids impair
mitochondrail energy production.]

A. Golay, et al., "Effect of lipid oxidation on the regulation of glucose
utilization in obese patients," Acta Diabetologica 32(1), 44-48, 1995. [Free
fatty acids strongly and quickly depress the ability to oxidize or store
glucose.]  

A. Gomes, et al., "Anti-hyperglycemic effect of black tea (Camellia sinensis)
in rat," J. of Ethnopharmacology 45(3), 223-226, 1995. It "was found to
possess both preventive and curative effects on experimentally produced
diabetes in rats."  

Y. Hattori, et al., "Phorbol esters elicit Ca++-dependent delayed contractions
in diabetic rat aorta," Eur. J. Pharmacol. 279(1), 51-58, 1995. [Diabetic
tissue is more responsive to activation of protein kinase C by phorbol
esters.]  

B. A. Houssay and C. Martinez, "Experimental diabetes and diet," Science 105,
548-549, 1947. [Mortality was zero on the high coconut oil diet, 100% on the
high lard diet. It was 90% on the low protein diet, and 33% on the high
protein diet. With a combination of coconut oil and lard, 20%.]  

B. A. Houssay, et al., "Accion de la administracion prolongada de glucosa
sobre la diabetes de la rata," Rev. Soc. argent. de biol. 23, 288-293, 1947.  

S. Ikemoto, et al., "High fat diet-induced hyperglycemia: Prevention by low
level expression of a glucose transporter (GLUT4) minigene in transgenic
mice," Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 92(8), 3096-3099, 1995. "...mice fed a high-
fat (safflower oil) diet develop defective glycemic control, hyperglycemia,
and obesity."  

M. Inaba, et al., "Influence of high glucose on 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D-3-induced effect on human osteoblast-like MG-63 cells," J. Bone Miner. Res.
10(7), 1050-1056, 1995.  

J. S. Jensen, et al., "Microalbuminuria reflects a generalized transvascular
albumin leakiness in clinically healthy subjects," Clin. Sci. 88(6), 629-633,
1995.  

G. Jorneskog, et al., "Skin capillary circulation severely impaired in toes of
patients with IDDM, with and without late diabetic complications,"
Diabetologia 38(4), 474-480, 1995.  

A. M. Kahn and T. Song, "Insulin inhibits dog vascular smooth muscle
contraction and lowers Ca++[i] by inhibiting Ca++ influx," J. of Nutrition
125(6 Suppl.), S1732-S1737, 1995.  

F. Kuhlencordt, et al., "Examination of the skeleton in diabetic patients up
to age 45," Deutsche med. Wchnschr. 91, 1913-1917, 1966. "Some patients have a
generalized osteoporosis-like process, and some have localized bone
lesions...."  

M. Kusunoki, et al., "Amelioration of high fat feeding-induced insulin
resistance in skeletal muscle with the antiglucocorticoid RU486," Diabetes
44(6), 718-720, 1995. "These results suggest that glucocorticoids play, in a
tissue-specific manner, a role in the maintenance and/or production of insulin
resistance produced by high-fat feeding."  

A. Lazarow, "Protection against alloxan diabetes," Anat. Rec. 97, 353, 1947.  

A. Lazarow, "Protective effect of glutathione and cysteine against alloxan
diabetes in the rat," Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. & Med. 61, 441-447, 1946. [While
certain doses of cysteine, glutathione, and thioglycolic acid completely
prevented alloxan diabetes, it was interesting that all of the rats receiving
ascorbic acid became diabetic. To me, this argues for the free radical cause
of diabetes, rather than just the sulfhydryl oxidation. Lazarow suggested that
succinic dehydrogenase, and various other sulfhydryl enzymes, including those
involved in fatty acid oxidation, might be involved.]  

R. B. Lipton and J. A. Fivecoate, "High risk of IDDM in African-American and
Hispanic children in Chicago, 1985-1990," Diabetes Care 18(4), 476-482, 1995.
"The relatively early age at onset may point to an environmental factor
associated with this high incidence of the disease."  

G. S. Meneilly, et al., "Insulin-mediated increase in blood flow is impaired
in the elderly," J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 80(6), 1899-1903, 1995. "Normal
aging is characterized by resistance to insulin-mediated glucose uptake."  

J. Ma, et al., "Associations of serum and dietary magnesium with
cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes, insulin, and carotid arterial
wall thickness: The ARIC study," J. Clin. Epidemiol. 48(7), 927-940, 1995.
[Carotid wall thickness increased in women as serum Mg level decreased.]  

Y. Matsumoto, et al., "Creatine kinase kinetics in diabetic cardiomyopathy,"
Amer. J. Physiol.-Endocrinol. Met. 31(5), E1070-E1076, 1995.  

F. Mercure and G. Vanderkraak, "Inhibition of gonadotropin-stimulated ovarian
steroid production by polyunsaturated fatty acids in teleost fish," Lipids
30(6), 547-554, 1995. "The inhibitory actions by PUFAs were not restricted to
long-chain PUFAs, as linoleic and linolenic acids had similar actions in the
goldfish. The inhibitory action of EPA on testosterone production was
reversible upon removal of the PUFA from medium." "[Stimulated]
...testosterone production ... was attenuated by PUFAs...."  

H. Mulder, et al., "Non-parallelism of islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin) and
insulin gene expression in rat islets following dexamethasone treatment,"
Diabetologia 38(4), 395-402, 1995.  

S. Nagasaka, et al., "Effect of glycemic control on calcium and phosphorus
handling and parathyroid hormone level in patients with non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus," Endocr. J. 42(3), 377-383, 1995. "...hyperglycemia causes
excess urinary calcium and phosphorus excretion in patients with NIDDM. In
response to urinary calcium loss, PTH secretion is mildly stimulated. Bone
formation seems to be suppressed in the hyperglycemic state in spite of
increased PTH secretion." [These are the changes I would expect to see in
hypothyroid people with high cortisol.]  

B. Oztas and M. Kucuk, "Influence of acute arterial hypertension on blood-
brain barrier permeability in streptozocin-induced diabetic rats,"
Neuroscience Letters 188(1), 53-56, 1995.  

S. Phillips, et al., "Neuropathic arthropathy of the spine in diabetes,"
Diabetes Care 18(6), 876-869, 1995.  

J. F. Pouliot and R. Beliveau, "Palmitoylation of the glucose transporter in
blood-brain barrier capillaries," Bioch. et Bioph. Acta--Biomembranes 1234(2),
191-196, 1995\. "Palmitoylation may be involved in the regulation of glucose
transport activity in hyperglycemia."  

R. Ramakrishnan and A. Namasivayam, "Norepinephrine and epinephrine levels in
the brain of alloxan diabetic rats," Neuroscience Letters 186(2-3), 200-202,
1995. [Epinephrine increased in striatum, hippocampus and hypothalamus,
Norepinephrine increased in hypothalamus and decreased in pons and medulla.]  

J. G. Regensteiner, et al., "Effects of non-insulin-dependent diabetes on
oxygen consumption during treadmill exercise," Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 27(6),
874-881, 1995. "The reduced rate of increase in oxygen consumption during
increasing submaximal work loads in NIDDM suggests that limitations in oxygen
delivery may impair exercise performance in otherwise healthy persons with
diabetes."  

A. A. Shaltout, et al., "High incidence of childhood-onset IDDM in Kuwait,"
Diabetes Care 18(7), 923-927, 1995. The incidence of IDDM in children is high
in the region and has apparently increased nearly fourfold in the last decade.
This is especially significant, since diabetes that appears in childhood is
especially important for the theory of genetic causation. This study should
give the gene people real trouble. They might have to call in the "gene for
bed-wetting" people to help with their case.  

M. A. Smith, et al., "Radical AGEing in Alzheimer's disease," Trends in
Neurosciences 18(4), 172-176, 1995.  

A. Tchernof, et al., "Relation of steroid hormones to glucose tolerance and
plasma insulin levels in men: Importance of visceral adipose tissue," Diabetes
Care 28(3), 292-299, 1995.  

A. Tchernof, et al., "Reduced testosterone and adrenal C-19 steroid levels in
obese men," Metabolism--Clin. and Exp. 44(4), 513-519, 1995. "...reduced
concentrations of testosterone and adrenal C-19 steroid precursors are
associated with increased body fatness rather than with excess visceral fat
accumulation." [These results] "...emphasize the importance of adrenal
steroids as correlates of body composition in men."  

B. G. Trumper, et al., "Circadian variation of insulin requirement in insulin
dependent diabetes mellitus--The relationship between circadian change in
insulin demand and diurnal patterns of growth hormone, cortisol and glucagon
during euglycemia," Hormone and Metabolic Research 27(3), 141-147, 1995. "The
results of the study showed that the early morning rise in the insulin demand
is related to the increased early morning cortisol secretion and to the
nocturnal peaks of growth hormone concentration."  

M. Udvardy, et al., "Altered lysis resistance of platelet-rich clots in
patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus," Thromb. Res. 79(1), 57-63,
1995. Suppression of clot-dissolving "...was remarkably stronger in IDDM,
along with the highest PAI-1 activity concentration ratio of the platelet
lysates, compared to plasmatic levels."  

P. Vague, et al., "Hypofibrinolysis and the insulin resistance syndrome," Int.
J. Obes. 19(Suppl. 1), S11-S15, 1995. Hypofibrinolysis is observed among obese
subjects and it has been shown that an excess of plasminogen activator
inhibitor 1 (PAI 1) the main regulator of the fibrinolytic system, is closely
associated to other components of the insulin resistance syndrome, namely,
excessive body weight, high waist to hip ratio, elevated blood pressure,
hyperinsulinemia and hypertriglyceridemia."  

E. O. Vianna and J. Garcialeme, "Allergen-induced airway inflammation in rats:
Role of insulin," American J. of Respiratory and Critical Care Med. 151(3),
809-814, 1995. "Clinical asthma appears to be less severe when diabetes
mellitus is superimposed."

A. Warley, et al., "Capillary surface area is reduced and tissue thickness
from capillaries to myocytes is increased in the left ventricle of
streptozotocin-diabetic rats," Diabetologia 38(4), 413-421, 1995.

G. C. Weir, "Which comes first in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus:
Insulin resistance or beta-cell failure? Both come first," JAMA 273(23),
1878-1879, 1995.  

N. R. Williams, et al., "Plasma, granulocyte and mononuclear cell copper and
zinc in patients with diabetes mellitus," Analyst 120(3), 887-890, 1995.
"...the copper and zinc status of these diabetic patients was reduced,
providing further evidence of a role for these antioxidant" trace elements in
this disease.  

T. Yamakawa, et al., "Augmented production of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in
obese mice," Clinical Immunology and Immunopathology 75(1), 51-56, 1995.
"...the TNF-alpha derived from adipose tissues might be involved in the
induction of peripheral insulin resistance..."  

T. Yamashita, et al., "Increased transendothelial permeation of albumin by
high glucose concentration," Metabolism 44(6), 739-744, 1995.  

M. B. Zemel, "Insulin resistance vs. hyperinsulinemia in hypertension: Insulin
regulation of Ca++ transport and Ca++-regulation of insulin sensitivity,"
Journal of Nutrition 125(6 Suppl.), S1738-S1743, 1995.  

B. M. Zenere, et al., "Noninvasive detection of functional alterations of the
arterial wall in IDDM patients with and without microalbuminuria," Diabetes
Care 18(7), 975-982, 1995\. [There is a reduced vasodilatory capacity in
diabetes, and especially in patients who are leaking albumin.]  

D. B. Zilvermit, et al., "Oxidation of glucose labelled with radioactive
carbon by normal and alloxandiabetic rats," J. Biol. Chem. 176, 389-400, 1948.
[Diabetic rats had the same rate of glucose oxidation as normal rats, in this
experiment. This is an artificial form of diabetes that doesn't immediately
involve an excess of unsaturated fatty acids, as occurs during stress,
estrogen excess, hypothyroidism, or diets high in polyunsaturated fats which
can cause a more "natural" kind of diabetes. The artificial alloxandiabetes
forces the animal to oxidize an excess of fatty acids, and eventually should
lead to the same kind of mitochondrial damage seen in natural diabetes.]  

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

