A R T I C L E Eclampsia in the Real Organism: A Paradigm of General Distress
Applicable in Infants, Adults, Etc. To prevent the appropriation and abuse of
our language by academic and professional cliques, I like to recall my
grandparents' speech. When my grandmother spoke of eclampsia, the word was
still normal English, that reflected the Greek root meaning, "shining out,"
referring to the visual effects that are often prodromal to seizures. The word
was most often used in relation to pregnancy, but it could also be applied to
similar seizures in young children. The word is the sort that might have been
coined by a person who had experienced the condition, but the experience of
seeing hallucinatory lights is seldom mentioned in the professional discussion
of "eclampsia and preeclampsia." Metaphoric thinking--using comparisons,
models, or examples--is our natural way of gaining new understanding. Ordinary
language, and culture, grow when insightful comparisons are generally adopted,
extending the meaning of old categories. Although the free growth of insight
and understanding might be the basic law of language and culture, we have no
institutions that are amenable to that principle of free development of
understanding. Institutions devoted to power and control are naturally hostile
to the free development of ideas. Among physicians, toxemia (meaning poisons
in the blood) has been used synonymously with preeclampsia, to refer to the
syndrome in pregnant women of high blood pressure, albumin in the urine, and
edema, sometimes ending in convulsions. Eclampsia is reserved for the
convulsions themselves, and is restricted to the convulsions which follow
preeclampsia, when there is "no other reason" for the seizure such as
"epilepsy" or cerebral hemorrhage. Sometimes it is momentarily convenient to
use medical terms, but we should never forget the quantity of outrageous
ignorance that is attached to so many technical words when they suggest the
identity of unlike things, and when they partition and isolate things which
have meaning only as part of a process. Misleading terminology has certainly
played an important role in retarding the understanding of the problems of
pregnancy. In 1974, when I decided to write Nutrition for Women, I was
motivated by the awful treatment I saw women receiving, especially during
pregnancy, from physicians and dietitians. Despite the research of people like
the Shutes and the Biskinds, there were still "educated" and influential
people who said that the mother's diet had no influence on the baby. (That
strange attitude affects many aspects of behavior and opinion.) How can people
believe that the mother's diet has no effect on the baby's health? Textbooks
used to talk about the "insulated" fetus, which would get sufficient nutrients
from the mother's body even if she were starving. To "prove" the doctrine, it
was pointed out that the fetus gets enough iron to make blood even when the
mother is anemic. In the last few years, the recognition that smoking,
drinking, and using other drugs can harm the baby has helped to break down the
doctrine of "insulation," but there is still not a medical culture in which
the effects of diet on the physiology of pregnancy are appreciated. This is
because of a mistaken idea about the nature of the organism and its
development. "Genes make the organism," according to this doctrine, and if
there are congenital defects in the baby, the genes are responsible. A simple
sort of causality flows from the genes to the finished organism, according to
that idea. It was taught that if "the genes" are really bad, the defective
baby can make the mother sick, and she contributed to the baby's bad genes.
The idea isn't completely illogical, but it isn't based on reality, and it is
demonstrably false. (Race, age and parity have no effect on incidence of
cerebral palsy; low birth weight and complications of pregnancy are associated
with it: J. F. Eastman, "Obstetrical background of 753 cases of cerebral
palsy," Obstet. Gynecol. Surv. 17, 459-497, 1962.) Although Sigmund Freud
sensibly argued in 1897 that it was more reasonable to think that an infant's
cerebral palsy was caused by the same factors that caused the mother's
sickness, than to think that the baby's cerebral palsy caused maternal
sickness and premature labor, more than 50 years later people were still
taking seriously the idea that cerebral palsy might cause maternal
complications and prematurity. (A.M. Lilienfield and E. Parkhurst, "A study of
the association of factors of pregnancy and parturition with the development
of cerebral palsy," Am. J. Hyg. 53, 262-282, 1951.) Medical textbooks and
articles still commonly list the conditions that are associated with
eclampsia: Very young and very old mothers, a first pregnancy or a great
number of previous pregnancies, diabetes, twins, obesity, excessive weight
gain, and kidney disease. Some authors, observing the high incidence of
eclampsia in the deep South, among Blacks and on American Indian reservations,
have suggested that it is a genetic disease because it "runs in families." If
poverty and malnutrition are also seen to "run in families," some of these
authors have argued that the bad genes which cause birth defects also cause
eclampsia and poverty. (L. C. Chesley, et al., "The familial factor in toxemia
of pregnancy," Obstet. Gynec. 32, 303-311, 1968, reported that women whose
mothers suffered eclampsia during their gestation were likely to have
eclampsia themselves. Some "researchers" have concluded that eclampsia is
good, because many of the babies die, eliminating the "genes" for eclampsia
and poverty.)* Any sensible farmer knows that pregnant animals must have good
food if they are to successfully bear healthy young, but of course those
farmers don't have a sophisticated knowledge of genetics. The inclusion of
obesity and "excessive weight gain" among the conditions associated with
eclampsia has distracted most physicians from the fact that malnutrition is
the basic cause of eclampsia. The pathologist who, knowing nothing about a
woman's diet, writes in his autopsy report that the subject is "a well
nourished" pregnant woman, reflects a medical culture which chooses to reduce
"nutritional adequacy" to a matter of gross body weight. The attempt to
restrict weight gain in pregnancy has expanded the problem of eclampsia beyond
its association with poverty, into the more affluent classes. Freud wasn't the
first physician who grasped the idea that the baby's health depends on the
mother's, and that her health depends on good nutrition. Between 1834 and
1843, John C. W. Lever, M.D., discovered that 9 out of 10 eclamptic women had
protein in their urine. He described an eclamptic woman who bore a premature,
low-weight baby, as having "...been living in a state of most abject penury
for two or three months, subsisting for days on a single meal of bread and
tea. Her face and body were covered with cachectic sores." ("Cases of
puerperal convulsions," Guy's Hospital Reports, Volume 1, series 2, 495-517,
1843.) S. S. Rosenstein observed that eclampsia was preceded by changes in the
serum (Traite Pratique des Maladies des Reins, Paris, 1874). L. A. A.
Charpentier specifically documented low serum albumin as a cause of eclampsia
(A Practical Treatise on Obstetrics, Volume 2, William Wood & Co., 1887).
Robert Ross, M.D., documented the role of malnutrition as the cause of
proteinuria and eclampsia (Southern Medical Journal 28, 120, 1935). In
outline, we can visualize a chain of causality beginning with a diet deficient
in protein, impairing liver function, producing inability to store glycogen,
to inactivate estrogen and insulin, and to activate thyroid. Low protein and
high estrogen cause increased tendency of the blood to clot. High estrogen
destroys the liver's ability to produce albumin (G. Belasco and G. Braverman,
Control of Messenger RNA Stability, Academic Press, 1994). Low thyroid causes
sodium to be lost. The loss of sodium albuminate causes tissue edema, while
the blood volume is decreased. Decreased blood volume and hemoconcentration
(red cells form a larger fraction of the blood) impair the circulation. Blood
pressure increases. Blood sugar becomes unstable, cortisol rises, increasing
the likelihood of premature labor. High estrogen, hypoglycemia, viscous blood,
increased tendency of the blood to clot cause seizures. Women who die from
eclampsia often have extensive intravascular clotting, and sometimes the brain
and liver show evidence of earlier damage, probably from clots that have been
cleared. (Sometimes prolonged clotting consumes fibrinogen, causing inability
to clot, and a tendency to hemorrhage.) M. M. Singh, "Carbohydrate metabolism
in pre-eclampsia," Br. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 83, 124-131. 1976. Sodium
decrease, R. L. Searcy, Diagnostic Biochemistry, McGraw-Hill, 1969. Viscosity,
L. C. Chesley, 'Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1978. Clotting, T. Chatterjee, et al., "Studies on plasma fibrinogen level in
preeclampsia and eclampsia, Experientia 34, 562-3, 1978; D. M. Haynes,
"Medical Complications During Pregnancy, McGraw-Hill Co. Blakiston Div., 1969.
Progesterone decrease, G. V. Smith, et al., "Estrogen and progestin metabolism
in pregnant women, with especial reference to pre-eclamptic toxemia and the
effect of hormone administration," Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 39, 405, 1940; R.
L. Searcy, Diagnostic Biochemistry, McGraw-Hill, 1969. But the simple chain of
causality has many lines of feedback, exacerbating the problem, and the
nutritional problem is usually worse than a simple protein deficiency. B
vitamin deficiencies alone are enough to cause the liver's underactivity, and
to cause estrogen dominance, and a simple vitamin A deficiency causes an
inability to use protein efficiently or to make progesterone, and in itself
mimics some of the effects of estrogen. Anything that causes a thyroid
deficiency will make the problem worse. Thyroid therapy alone has had
spectacular success in treating and preventing eclampsia. (H. O. Nicholson,
1904, cited in Dieckman's Toxemias of Pregnancy, 1952; 1929, Barczi, of
Budapest; Broda Barnes, who prescribed thyroid as needed, delivered more than
2,000 babies and never had a case of pre-eclampsia, though statistically 100
would have been expected.) The clotting which sometimes kills women, can, if
it is not so extensive, cause spotty brain damage, similar to that seen in
"multiple sclerosis," or it can occur in the liver, or other organ, or in the
placenta, or in the fetus, especially in its brain and liver. Some cases of
supposed "post-partum psychosis" have been the result of multiple strokes.
When large clots occur in the liver or placenta, the fibrinogen which has been
providing the fibrin for disseminated intravascular coagulation can appear to
be consumed faster than it is produced by the liver. I think its disappearance
may sometimes be the result of the liver's diminished blood supply, rather
than the "consumption" which is the way this situation is usually explained.
It is at this point that hemorrhages, rather than clots, become the problem.
The undernourished liver can produce seizures in a variety of ways--clots,
hemorrhages, hypoglycemia, and brain edema, for example, so eclampsia needn't
be so carefully discriminated from "the other causes of seizures." Because I
had migraines as a child, I was interested in their cause. Eating certain
foods, or skipping meals, seemed to be involved, but I noticed that women
often had migraines premenstrually. Epilepsy too, I learned, often occurred
premenstrually. In my experience of migraine, nausea and pain followed the
visual signs, which consisted of a variable progression of blind spots and
lights. When I eventually learned that I could stop the progression of
symptoms by quickly eating a quart of ice cream, I saw that my insight could
be applied to other situations in which similar visual events played a role,
especially "eclampsia" and "epilepsy." For example, a woman who was 6 months
pregnant called me around 10 o'clock one morning, to say that she had gone
blind, and was alone in her country house. She said she had just eaten
breakfast around 9 AM, and wasn't hungry, but I knew that the 6 month fetus
has a great need for glucose, so I urged her to eat some fruit. She called me
15 minutes later to report that she had eaten a banana, and her vision had
returned. Early in pregnancy, "morning sickness" is a common problem, and it
is seldom thought to have anything to do with eclampsia, because of the
traditional medical idea that the fetus "causes" eclampsia, and in the first
couple of months of pregnancy the conceptus is very small. But salty
carbohydrate (soda crackers, typically) is the standard remedy for morning
sickness. Some women have "morning sickness" premenstrually, and it (like the
nausea of migraine) is eased by salt and carbohydrate. X-ray studies have
demonstrated that there are spasms of the small intestine (near the bile duct)
associated with estrogen-induced nausea. Hypoglycemia is just one of the
problems that develops when the liver malfunctions, but it is so important
that orange juice or Coca Cola or ice cream can provide tremendous relief from
symptoms. Sodium (orange juice and Pepsi provide some) helps to absorb the
sugar, and--more basically--is essential for helping to restore the blood
volume. Pepsi has been recommened by the World Health Organization for the
rehydration of babies with diarrhea, in whom hypovolemia (thickening of the
blood from loss of water) is also a problem. The problem of refeeding starving
people has many features in common with the problem of correcting the liver
malfunction and hormone imbalances which follow prolonged malnutrition of a
milder sort. The use of the highest quality protein (egg yolk or potato juice,
or at least milk or meat) is important, but the supplementation of thyroid
containing T 3 is often necessary. Intravenous albumin, hypertonic solutions
of glucose and sodium, and magnesium in an effective form should be helpful
(magnesium sulfate injected intramuscularly is the traditional treatment for
eclampsia, since it is quickly effective in stopping convulsions). While the
sodium helps to restore blood volume and to regulate glucose, under some
circumstances (high aldosterone) it helps to retain magnesium; aldosterone is
not necessarily high during eclampsia.. Triiodothyronine directly promotes
cellular absorption of magnesium. Hypertonic glucose with minerals is known to
decrease the destruction of protein during stress: M. Jeevanandam, et al.,
Metabolism 40, 1199-1206, 1991. Katherina Dalton observed that her patients
who suffered from PMS (and were benefitted by progesterone treatment) were
likely to develop "toxemia" when they became pregnant, and to have problems at
the time of menopause. In these women, it is common for "menstruation" to
continue on the normal cycle during the first several months of pregnancy.
This cyclic bleeding seems to represent times of an increased ratio of
estrogen to progesterone, and during such periods of cyclic bleeding the risk
of miscarriage is high. Researchers found that a single injection of
progesterone could sometimes eliminate the signs of toxemia for the remainder
of the pregnancy. Katherina Dalton, who continued to give her patients
progesterone throughout pregnancy, later learned that the babies treated in
this way were remarkably healthy and bright, while the average baby delivered
after a "toxemic" pregnancy has an IQ of only 85. Marian Diamond's work with
rats clearly showed that increased exposure to estrogen during pregnancy
reduced the size of the cerebral cortex and the animals' ability to learn,
while progesterone increased the brain size and intelligence. Zamenhof's
studies suggested that these hormones probably have their effects largely
through their actions on glucose, though they also affect the availability of
oxygen in the same way, and have a variety of direct effects on brain cells
that would operate toward the same end. If Katherina Dalton's patients' IQs
averaged 130, instead of the expected 85, the potential social effects of
proper health care during pregnancy are enormous. But there is evidence that
healthy gestation affects more than just the IQ. Strength of character,
ability to reason abstractly, and the absence of physical defects, for
example, are strongly associated with weight at birth. Government studies and
Social Security statistics suggest the size of the problem. The National
Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke found that birth weight was
directly related to IQ at age four, and that up to half of all children who
were underweight at birth have an IQ under 70.(Chase.) According to standard
definitions, about 8% of babies in the U.S. have low birth weight. Among
people receiving Social Security income because of disability that existed at
the age of 18, 75% were disabled before birth. In 94% of these cases, the
abnormality was neurological. (HEW.) A study of 8 to 10-year-old children
found that abstract verbal reasoning and perceptual/motor integration are more
closely related to birth weight than they are to IQ. (Wiener.) National
nutritional data show that in the U.S. the development of at least a million
babies a year is "substantially compromised" by prenatal malnutrition.
Miscarriages, which are also causally related to poor nutrition, occur at a
rate of a few hundred thousand per year. (Williams.) When a muscle is
fatigued, it swells, taking up sodium and water, and it is likely to become
sore. Energy depletion causes any cell to take up water and sodium, and to
lose potassium. An abnormal excess of potassium in the blood, especially when
sodium is low, affects nerve, muscle, and secretory cells; a high level of
potassium can stop the heart, for example. Cellular energy can be depleted by
a combination of work, insufficient food or oxygen, or a deficiency of the
hormones needed for energy production. When the swelling happens suddenly, the
movement of water and sodium from the blood plasma into cells decreases the
volume of blood, while the quantity of red cells remains the same, making the
blood more viscous. During the night, as adrenalin, cortisol, and other stress
hormones rise, our blood becomes more viscous and clots more easily. In rats,
it has been found that the concentration of serum proteins increases
significantly during the night, presumably because water is moving out of the
circulatory system. Even moderate stress causes some loss of water from the
blood. If a person is malnourished, a moderate stress can overcome the body's
regulatory capacity. If tissue damage is extreme, or blood loss is great, even
a healthy person experiences hypovolemia and shock. C.A. Crenshaw, who was a
member of the trauma team at Parkland Hospital in Dallas that worked on
Kennedy and Oswald, had been involved in research with G. T. Shires on
traumatic shock. In his words, "we made medical history by discovering that
death from hemorrhagic shock (blood loss) can be due primarily to the body's
adjunctive depletion of internal salt water into the cells." (Shires' work
involved isotopes of sodium to show that sodium seems to be taken up by cells
during shock.) According to Crenshaw, "Oswald did not die from damaged
internal organs. He died from the chemical imbalances of hemorrhagic shock.
From the time he was shot...until the moment fluids were introduced into the
body..." [19 minutes] "there was very little blood circulating in Oswald's
body. As a result, he was not getting oxygen, and waste built up in his cells.
Then, when the fluids were started, the collection of waste from the cells was
dumped into the bloodstream, suddenly increasing the acid level, and
delivering these impurities to his heart. When the contaminated blood reached
the heart, it went into arrest...." The "waste" he refers to includes
potassium and lactic acid. Crenshaw advocates the use of Ringer's lactate to
replace some of the lost fluid. Since the blood already contains a large
amount of lactate because the body is unable to consume it, this doesn't seem
reasonable. I think a hypertonic version of Locke's solution, containing
glucose and sodium bicarbonate as well as sodium chloride, would be better,
though I think the potassium should be omitted too, and extra magnesium would
seem desirable. Triiodothyronine, I suspect, would help tremendously to deal
with the problems of shock, causing potassium, magnesium, and phosphate to
move back into cells, and sodium to move out, helping to restore blood volume
and reduce the wasteful conversion of glucose to lactic acid.. Albumin has
been used therapeutically in preeclampsia (Kelman), to restore blood volume.
Synthetic polymers with similar osmotic properties are sometimes used in
shock, and might also be useful in eclampsia, but simply eating extra protein
quickly restores blood albumin. For example, in a group of women who were in
their seventh month of pregnancy, the normal women's serum osmotic pressure
was 247 mm. of water, that of the women with nonconvulsive toxemia was 215
mm., and in the women with eclampsia, the albumin and osmotic pressure were
lowest, with a pressure of 175 mm. In the eighth month, the toxemic women who
ate 260 grams of protein daily had a 7% increase in osmotic pressure, and a
group who ate 20 grams had a decline of 9%.(Strauss) In a group of
preeclamptics, plasma volume was 39% below that of normal pregnant women. If
the physiology of shock has some relevance for eclampsia, so does the
physiology of heart failure, since Meerson has shown that it is a consequence
of uncompensated stress. The failing heart shifts from mainly glucose
oxidation to the inefficient use of fatty acids, which are mobilized during
stress, and with its decreased energy supply, it is unable to beat
efficiently, since it remains in a partly contracted state. Estrogen (which is
increased in men who have had heart attacks) is another factor which decreases
the heart's stroke volume, and estrogen is closely associated with the
physiology of the free unsaturated fatty acids. The partly contracted state of
the heart is effectively a continuation of the partly contracted state of the
blood vessels that causes the hypertension, and reduced tissue perfusion seen
in shock and eclampsia. Since shock can be seen as a generalized inflammatory
state, and since aspirin has been helpful in protecting against heart disease,
it's reasonable that aspirin has been tried as a treatment in pre-eclampsia.
It seems to protect the fetus against intrauterine growth retardation, an
effect that I think relates to aspirin's ability to protect in several ways
against excesses of uunsaturated fatty acids and of estrogen. But, since
aspirin can interfere with blood clotting, its use around the time of
childbirth can be risky, and it is best to correct the problem early enough
that aspirin isn't needed. Besides protein deficiency and other nutritional
deficiencies, excess estrogen and low thyroid can also limit the liver's
ability to produce albumin. Hypovolemia reduces liver function, and (like
hepatic infarcts) will reduce its ability to maintain albumin production.. The
studies which have found that hospitalized patients with the lowest albumin
are the least likely to survive suggest that the hypovolemia resulting from
hepatic inefficiency is a problem of general importance, and that it probably
relates to the multiple organ failure which is an extremely common form of
death among hospitalized patients. A diet low in sodium and protein probably
kills many more people than has been documented. If old age is commonly a
hypovolemic condition, then the common salt restriction for old-age
hypertension is just as irrational as is salt-restriction in pregnancy or in
shock. Thyroid (T 3), glucose, sodium, magnesium and protein should be
considered in any state in which weakened homeostatic control of the
composition of plasma is evident. *Note: Although Konrad Lorenz (who later
received the Nobel Prize) was the architect of the Nazi's policy of "racial
hygiene" (extermination of those with unwanted physical, cultural, or
political traits which were supposedly determined by "genes") he took his
ideas from the leading U.S. geneticists, whose works were published in the
main genetics journals. Following the Nazis' defeat, some of these journals
were renamed, and the materials on eugenics were often removed from libraries,
so that a new historical resume could be presented by the profession.
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES G. Wiener, et al., "Correlates of low birth weight:
Psychological status at eight to ten years of age," Pediatr. Res. 2, 110-118,
1968. A. Chase, "The great pellagra cover-up," Psychol. Today, pp. 83-86,
Feb., 1975. Prevention Handbook, Natl. Assoc. for Retarded Citizens, 1974. US
HEW, The Women and Their Pregnancies, W.B. Saunders Co., 1972. M. Winick and
P. Rosso, "The effect of severe early malnutrition on cellular growth of human
brain," Pediatr. Res. 3, 181-184, 1969. Roger Williams, Nutrition Against
Disease, Pitman Publ., 1971. H.M. Schmeck, Jr., "Brain harm in US laid to food
lack," N.Y. times, Nov. 2, 1975. R. Hurley, Poverty and Mental Retardation: A
Causal Relationship, Random House, 1970. D. Shanklin and J. Hodin, Maternal
Nutrition and Child Health, C. C. Thomas, 1978. H.H. Reese, H. A. Paskind, and
E. L. Sevringhaus, 1936 Year Book of Neurology, Psychiatry and Endocrinology,
Year Book Publishers, Chicago, 1937. M. B. Strauss, "Observations on the
etiology of the toxemias of pregnancy: The relationship of nutritional
deficiency, hypoproteinemia, and elevated venous pressure to water retention
in pregnancy," Am. J. Med. Sci. 190, 811-824, 1935. "Albumin concentration can
be used for mild preeclampsia," Obstet. Gynecol. News, October 1, 1974. L.
Kelman, et al., "Effects of dietary protein restriction on albumin synthesis,
albumin catabolism, and the plasma aminogram," Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 25,
1174-1178, 1972. T. H. Brewer, "Role of malnutrition, hepatic dysfunction, and
gastrointestinal bacteria in the pathogenesis of acute toxemia of pregnancy,"
Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 84, 1253-1256, 1962. "Plasma volume 'a clue' to
hypertension risks," Obstet. Gynecol. Observer, August/September, 1975. C. A.
Crenshaw, MD, J. Hansen and J. G. Shaw, JFK: Conspiracy of Silence, Signet,
1992. T. Backstrom, "Epileptic seizures in women related to plasma estrogen
and progesterone during the menstrual cycle," Acta Neurol. Scand. 54, 321-347,
1976. C. Muller, et al., "Reversible bilateral cerebral changes on magnetic
resonance imaging during eclampsia," Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift
121(39), 1184-1188, 1996. (Brain edema was demonstrated.) Uzan S; Merviel P;
Beaufils M; Breart G; Salat-Baroux J. [Aspirin during pregnancy. Indications
and modalities of prescription after the publication of the later trials].
Presse Medicale, 1996 Jan 6-13, 25(1):31-6. Aspirin, an inhibitor of cyclo-
oxygenase, is prescribed in a number of conditions related to abnormal
production of prostaglandins including gravidic hypertension. Results of the
most recent trials demonstrate that in patients with a past history of pre-
eclampsia or intra-uterine growth retardation, a pathological Doppler
examination of the uterus, a pathological angiotensin test or an
antiphospholipid syndrome, prescription of aspirin at the dose of 100 mg/day
can prevent recurrence or development of pre-eclampsia or intra-uterine growth
retardation. Treatment should begin as soon as possible during pregnancy,
certainly before development of clinical manifestations. After history taking
and identification of possible contraindications, bleeding time (Ivy method)
is recorded before and after prescription and should be lower than 8 minutes.
In case bleeding time exceeds 10 minutes 10 to 15 days after initiating
aspirin, doses may be reduced to 50 mg per day or even 50 mg every two or
three days to reach the target level. Treatment should generally be continued
up to 36 weeks gestation. Randall, C L; Anton, R F; Becker, H C; Hale, R L;
Ekblad, U. Aspirin dose-dependently reduces alcohol-induced birth defects and
prostaglandin E levels in mice. Teratology, v.44, n.5, (1991): 521-530. The
purpose of the present study was threefold. The first purpose was to determine
if aspirin (ASA) decreases alcohol-induced birth defects in mice in a dose-
dependent fashion. The second purpose was to see if the antagonism of alcohol-
induced birth defects afforded by ASA pretreatment was related to dose-
dependent decreases in prostaglandin E (PGE) levels in uterine/embryo tissue.
The third purpose was to determine if ASA pretreatment altered maternal blood
alcohol level.” In experiments 1 and 2, pregnant C57BL/6J mice were
administered ASA (0, 18.75, 37.5, 75, 150, or 300 mg/kg) on gestation day 10.
One hour following the subcutaneous injection of ASA, mice received alcohol
(5.8 g/kg) or an isocaloric sucrose solution intragastrically. In experiment 1
the incidence of birth defects was assessed in fetuses delivered by caesarean
section on gestation day 19. In experiment 2 uterine/embryo tissue samples
were collected on gestation day 10 1 hr following alcohol intubation for
subsequent PGE analysis. In experiment 3 blood samples were taken at five time
points following alcohol intubation from separate groups of alcohol-treated
pregnant mice pretreated with 150 mg/kg ASA or vehicle The results from the
three experiments indicated that ASA dose-dependently reduced the frequency of
alcohol-induced birth defects in fetuses examined at gestation day 19, ASA
decreased the levels of PGE in gestation day 10 uterine/embryo tissue in a
similar dose-dependentfashion, and ASA pretreatment did not significantly
influence maternalblood alcohol levels. These results provide additional
support for the hypothesis that PGs may play an important role in mediating
the teratogenic actions of alcohol. Prevention of fetal growth retardation
with low-dose aspirin: findings of the EPREDA trial [see comments] Uzan S;
Beaufils M; Breart G; Bazin B; Capitant C; Paris J. Lancet, 1991 Jun 15,
337:8755, 1427-31 The efficacy of low-dose aspirin in preventing fetal growth
retardation was tested in a randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind
trial. A secondary aim was to find out whether dipyridamole improves the
efficacy of aspirin. 323 women at 15-18 weeks' amenorrhoea were selected at
twenty-five participating centres on the basis of fetal growth retardation
and/or fetal death or abruptio placentae in at least one previous pregnancy.
They were randomly allocated to groups receiving placebo, 150 mg/day aspirin,
or 150 mg/day aspirin plus 225 mg/day dipyridamole, for the remainder of the
pregnancy. In the first phase of the trial all actively treated patients (n =
156) were compared with the placebo group (n = 73). Mean birthweight was
significantly higher in the treated than in the placebo group (2751 [SD 670]
vs 2526 [848] g; difference 225 g [95% CI 129-321 g], p = 0.029) and the
frequency of fetal growth retardation in the placebo group was twice that in
the treated group (19 [26%] vs 20 [13%]; p less than 0.02). The frequencies of
stillbirth (4 [5%] vs 2 [1%]) and abruptio placentae (6 [8%] vs 7 [5%]) were
also higher in the placebo than in the treated group. The benefits of aspirin
treatment were greater in patients with two or more previous poor outcomes
than in those with only one. In the second analysis, of aspirin only (n = 127)
vs aspirin plus dipyridamole (n = 119), no significant differences were found.
There was no excess of maternal or neonatal side-effects in the aspirin-
treated patients. An aspirin a day to prevent prematurity. Sibai BM. Clin
Perinatol, 1992 Jun, 19:2, 305-17. Intrauterine fetal growth retardation and
preeclampsia remain a substantial cause of preterm birth world wide. There is
evidence to suggest that a functional imbalance between vascular prostacyclin
and platelet-derived thromboxane A2 production plays a central role in the
pathogenesis of these disorders. Low-dose aspirin appears to reverse the above
functional balance resulting in increased prostacyclin to thromboxane ratio.
The efficacy and safety of low-dose aspirin in preventing preeclampsia and
fetal growth retardation were tested in several randomized and uncontrolled
trials. The data in the literature suggest that low-dose aspirin is effective
in reducing preterm birth due to the above complications in selected high-risk
pregnant women. Rosental, D G; Machiavelli, G A; Chernavsky, A C; Speziale, N
S; Burdman, J A. Indomethacin inhibits the effects of estrogen in the anterior
pituitary gland of the rat. Journal of Endocrinology, v.121, n.3, (1989):
513-520. Two inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis, indomethacin and aspirin,
blocked the increase of oestrogen-binding sites in the nuclear subcellular
fraction, an increase which occurs after the administration of oestradiol.
Zanagnolo, V; Dharmarajan, A M; Endo, K; Wallach, E E. Effects of
acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) and naproxen sodium (naproxen) on ovulation,
prostaglandin, and progesterone production in the rabbit. Fertility and
Sterility, v.65, n.5, (1996): 1036-1043. ^^^ Top ^^^

