![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Epilepsy and Progesterone**  

The length of the life-span, and of the period of youth or immaturity, is
closely associated with the size of the brain, and the brain has a very high
rate of metabolism. When something interferes with this very high metabolic
rate, the consequences may be instantanteous,* or developmental, or chronic
and degenerative, or even transgenerational. The issue of epilepsy centers on
questions of brain metabolism, and so it has all of those dimensions.  

As I discuss the mechanisms known to predispose a person to epilepsy, I will
emphasize the centrality of oxidative energy production, and show how
"stroke," "stress," "hyperactivity," "dementia," and other brain syndromes are
related to "epilepsy." (Similar processes are being studied in the heart and
other tissues; eventually, we might have a general language that will make it
easier to understand the parallels in the various kinds of "seizure" in any
organ.)  

As an old term, "epilepsy" has aquired a burden of pseudoscientific ideas,
covering old superstitions with an overlay of new superstitions. [Hereditary
epilepsy has been discussed in countless textbooks and medical journals, but I
think a much better case could be made for the inheritance of a tendency to
offer stupid genetic explanations.] "Hereditary epilepsy" and "idiopathic
epilepsy" are seriously pathogenic terms; "brain scar" sometimes has a factual
basis, but most often the term is an evasion of understanding.  

As long as we realize that the essential meaning of the word is "something
that grabs you," "epilepsy" is a convenient way to refer to a cluster of
convulsive states, fainting spells, night-terrors and nightmares, and strange
sensations.  

Seizures can be caused by lack of glucose, lack of oxygen, vitamin B6
deficiency, and magnesium deficiency. They are more likely to occur during the
night, during puberty, premenstrually, during pregnancy, during the first year
of life, and can be triggered by hyperventilation, running, strong emotions,
or unusual sensory stimulation. Water retention and low sodium increase
susceptibility to seizures. When I was in high school, our dog found and ate a
pint of bacon grease, and shortly afterward had a convulsive seizure. I knew
of veterinarians who treated seizures in dogs with a vermifuge, so it seemed
obvious that a metabolic disturbance, especially if combined with intestinal
irritation, could cause fits.  

It was undoubtedly such observations that led some physicians to advocate
removal of the colon as treatment for epilepsy. Pregnancy and the menstrual
cycle have been recognized as having something to do with seizures, but when
seizures occurred only during pregnancy, they were classified as nonepileptic,
and when they had a clear premenstrual occurrence, they were likely to be
classified as "hysterical fits," to be treated with punishment.  

It has been observed that all "recognized" anti-seizure drugs are teratogenic,
and women who are taking such drugs are told that pregnancy might kill them if
they stop the drug, but that their babies will have a greatly increased risk
of birth defects if they take the drugs during pregnancy. This is why a better
understanding of epilepsy is very important. Old therapies are mainly
important for the insight they can give into the nature of the physiological
problem. Some of the well established clinical-laboratory observations (F.
Mora, and C. S. Babel, for example) give strong hints as to the physiological
problem, for example, low albumin, high prealbumin, low magnesium and high
calcium all suggest hypothyroidism. (Problems with the bowel, liver, and sex
hormones are highly associated with hypothyroidism, both as causes and as
effects.) Water retention was so clearly involved in seizures that increased
water intake was used as a diagnostic procedure. (R. Grinker) Unfortunately,
animal experiments showed that water intoxication increased susceptibility to
seizures even in normal individuals. Low sodium content in the body fluids
also predisposed to seizures, so that someone with hyponatremia (low blood
sodium) would be more susceptible to induction of a seizure by excessive water
intake. (Excessive water uptake is still recognized as a factor in seizures,
but now it is seen as part of a complex process, involving energy, hormones,
and transmitter substances. E.g., Kempski; Chan.)  

Hypothyroid people tend to lose sodium easily, and unopposed estrogen
increases water retention, without an equivalent sodium retention, so low
thyroid, high estrogen people have two of the conditions (edema and
hyponatremia) known to predispose to seizures. Another outstanding feature of
seizures of various sorts is that they are most likely to occur at night,
especially in the early pre-dawn hours. Low blood sugar and high adrenalin
predominate during those hours. Hypoglycemia, in itself, like oxygen
deprivation, is enough to cause convulsions.  

Progesterone and thyroid promote normal energy production, and their
deficiency causes a tendency toward hypoglycemia, edema and instability of
nerves.  

Twenty years ago, a woman who was considered demented visited me. From the age
of 21, she had been increasingly disabled by premenstrual migraines. When she
was 35 she was a school teacher, and during the summer a neurologist told her
that dilantin would help her headaches, because "migraine is similar to
epilepsy." Although she told the neurologist that the drug made her "too
stupid to teach school," he offered her no alternatives, and didn't mention
that sudden withdrawal from the drug could trigger a seizure. When classes
started she discontinued the dilantin and had a seizure. The neurologist said
the seizure proved that migraines were a form of epilepsy. At the age of 52,
she spent about 20 hours a day in bed, and couldn't go outside by herself,
because she would get lost. After using a little progesterone for a few days,
she stopped having seizures, discontinued her drugs, and was able to work.
When she returned to graduate school, she got straight As, and earned her
masters' degree in gerontology. But she had lost 17 years because the drug
industry had covered up the role of the hormones in epilepsy, migraine, and
the perimenstrual syndrome.  

The most popular anticonvulsant drugs are both neurotoxic and teratogenic,
that is, they damage the patient's brain, and greatly increase the incidence
of birth defects. The Nazis justified their horrible medical experiments as
"science," but the effects of epilepsy medicine in the last half century have
been similar in effect, grander in scale, and without any scientific
justification.  

Besides the specific promotional efforts of the drug industry and their branch
of government, there is a broader situation that makes their work easier. It
is a culture of goony ideas, that ultimately emanates from the academic elite,
which (since Descartes, and before) places "thought" above evidence. In
biology, "genes" and "membranes" are confused ideas that are used to justify
actions that aren't based on evidence. For the Nazis, "cultural degeneracy"
was a medical-biological-political category based on that style of thinking.
In the United States, "genes" for epilepsy, hyperactivity, language
development, IQ, eclampsia, etc., are "found" at Harvard/MIT/Stan-
ford/Yale/Univ. of California, etc., by an elite whose wits have been dulled
by environmental deprivation, that is, by a lack of criticism.

By manipulating the diet and environment, animals can be made more or less
seizure-prone, and it happens that the changes that affect the brain affect
all other organs, in ways that are now fairly well understood. Examining the
cellular events associated with a seizure is useful for therapy and prevention
of seizures, but the same methods are helpful for many other conditions. It is
now clearly established that stress can cause brain damage, as well as other
diseases. Now that our public health establishment has eliminated smoking from
public places, maybe they can find a way to reduce stress and disease by
removing morons from positions of power.  

Excitotoxicity, in its simplest sense, is the harmful cellular effect (death
or injury) caused by an excitatory transmitter such as glutamate or aspartate
acting on a cell whose energetic reserves aren't adequate to sustain the level
of activity provoked by the transmitter. Once an excitotoxic state exists, the
consequences of cell exhaustion can increase the likelihood that the condition
will spread to other cells, since any excitation can trigger a complex of
other excitatory processes. As calcium enters cells, potassium leaves, and
enzymes are activated, producing free fatty acids (linoleic and arachidonic,
for example) and prostaglandins, which activate other processes, including
lipid peroxidation and free radical production. Protein kinase C (promoted by
unsaturated fats and estrogen) facilitates the release of excitatory amino
acids. (See J. W. Phillis and M. H. O'Regan, "Mechanisms of glutamate and
aspartate release in the ischemic rat cerebral cortex," Br. Res. 730(1-2),
150-164, 1996.) Estrogen supports acetylcholine release, which leads to
increased extracellular potassium and excitatory amino acids. (See R. B.
Gibbs, et al., "Effects of estrogen on potassium-stimulated acetylcholine
release in the hippocampus and overlying cortex of adult rats," Br. Res.
749(1), 143-146, 1997.)  

Estrogen also stimulates the production of free radicals. Calcium, free
radicals, and unsaturated free fatty acids impair energy production,
decreasing the ability to regulate potassium and calcium. The increased
estrogen associated with seizures is associated with reduced serum calcium
(Jacono and Robertson, 1987). Feedback self-stimulation of free radicals, free
fatty acids, and prostaglandins create a bias toward increased excitation.  

Ammonia is produced by stimulated nerves, and normally its elimination helps
to eliminate and control the excitotoxic amino acids, glutamate and aspartate.
The production of urea consumes aspartic acid, converting it to fumaric acid,
but this requires carbon dioxide, produced by normal mitochondrial function. A
deficiency of carbon dioxide would reduce the delivery of oxygen to the brain
by constricting blood vessels and changing hemoglobin's affinity for oxygen
(limiting carbon dioxide production), and the failure to consume aspartate (in
urea synthesis) and glutamate (as alpha-ketoglutarate) and aspartate (as
oxaloacetate) in the Krebs cycle, means that as energy becomes deficient,
excitation tends to be promoted. This helps to explain the fact that seizures
can be induced by hypoxia. (Balloonists and mountain climbers at extremely
high elevations have mentioned suffering from severe insomnia. The mechanisms
of excitotoxicity are probably involved in other forms of insomnia, too.)
Antioxidants help to control seizures, by reducing the excitatory contribution
of free radicals and lipid peroxidation. Since excitation can promote the
toxic forms of oxidation, many surprising substances turn out to have an
"antioxidant" function. Magnesium, sodium (balancing calcium and potassium),
thyroid and progesterone (increasing energy production), and in some
situations, carbon dioxide. Aspirin, by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis
(and maybe other mechanisms) often lowers free radical production. Adenosine
seems to have a variety of antioxidant functions, and one mechanism seems to
be its function as an antiexcitatory transmitter. One of estrogen's excitant
actions on the brain probably involves its antagonism to adenosine (Phillis
and O'Regan, 1988).  

Albumin, besides maintaining blood volume and preventing edema, serves to
protect respiration, by binding free fatty acids. Estrogen blocks the liver's
ability to produce albumin, and increases the level of circulating free fatty
acids. Free fatty acids cause brain edema. This is probably another aspect of
estrogen's contribution to seizure susceptibility. Magnesium sulfate has been
used for generations in India to treat eclampsia and "toxemia" of pregnancy,
and its effectiveness is gradually coming to be recognized in the U.S.
Increasingly, magnesium deficiency is recognized as a factor that increases
susceptibility to seizures. (Valenzuela and Benardo, 1995; Slandley, et al.,
1995). Hypothyroidism reduces the ability of cells to retain magnesium.
Thyroid does many things to protect against seizures. It keeps estrogen and
adrenal hormones low, and increases production of progesterone and
pregnenolone. It facilitates retention of magnesium and of sodium, and
prevents edema in a variety of ways.  

Progesterone, because of its normal anesthetic function (which prevents the
pain of childbirth when its level is adequate), directly quiets nerves, and in
this way suppresses many of the excitotoxic processes. It has direct effects
on mitochondria, promoting energy production, and it facilitates thyroid
hormone functions in various ways. It promotes the elimination of estrogen
from tissues, and is a "diuretic" in several benign ways, that are compatible
with maintenance of blood volume. It antagonizes the mineralocorticoids and
the glucocorticoids, both of which promote seizures. (Roberts and Keith,
1995.) The combination of hypoglycemia with elevation of cortisone probably
accounts for the nocturnal incidence of seizures.  

If progesterone's antiepileptic effectiveness were not enough (and it is very
effective even in irrational pharmaceutical formulations), the fact that it
reduces birth defects, and promotes brain development and nerve repair should
assure its general use in women with a history of seizures, until it is
established that they are no longer "epileptic." Although thyroid,
progesterone, and a high quality protein diet will generally correct the
epilepsy problem, it is important to mention that the involvement of
unsaturated fats and free radicals in seizure physiology implies that we
should minimize our consumption of the unsaturated fats. Even years after
eliminating them from the diet, their release from tissue storage can prolong
the problem, and during that time the use of vitamin E is likely to reduce the
intensity and frequency of seizures. Coconut oil lowers the requirement for
vitamin E, and reduces the toxicity of the unsaturated fats (see Cleland, et
al.), favoring effective respiration and improving thyroid and progesterone
production. Endotoxin formed in the bowel can block respiration and cause
hormone imbalances contributing to instability of the nerves, so it is helpful
to optimize bowel flora, for example with a carrot salad; a dressing of
vinegar, coconut oil and olive oil, carried into the intestine by the carrot
fiber, suppresses bacterial growth while stimulating healing of the wall of
the intestine. The carrot salad improves the ratio of progesterone to estrogen
and cortisol, and so is as appropriate for epilepsy as for premenstrual
syndrome, insomnia, or arthritis.  
  

NOTES:  

When the brain loses its oxygen supply, consciousness is lost immediately,
before there is much decrease in the ATP concentration. This has led to the
proposal of interesting "electronic" ideas of consciousness, but there is
another way of viewing this. While ATP constitutes a kind of reservoir of
cellular energy, the flow of carbon dioxide through the brain cell is almost
the mirror image of the flow of oxygen. Oxygen scarcity leads directly to
carbon dioxide scarcity. The "sensitive state," consciousness, might require
the presence of carbon dioxide as well as ATP, to sustain a cooperative, semi-
stable, state of the cytoplasmic proteins. The ability of ordinary light to
trigger a conformation change in the hemoglobin-carbon monoxide-carbon dioxide
system shows how sensitive a system with only a few elements can be. At the
other extreme from consciousness, there is the evidence that carbon dioxide is
essential for even the growing/living state of protozoa, algae, and
bacteria.(O. Rahn, 1941.)  

O. Rahn, "Protozoa need carbon dioxide for growth," Growth 5, 197-199, 1941.
"On page 113 of this volume, the statement of Valley and Rettger that all
bacteria need carbon dioxide for growth had been shown to apply to young as
well as old cells." "...it is possible...to remove it as rapidly as it is
produced, and under these circumstances, bacteria cannot multiply."  

REFERENCES  

E. Tauboll, et al., "The progesterone metabolite 5-alpha-pregnan-3-alpha-
ol-20-one reduces K+-induced GABA and glutamate release from identified nerve
terminals in rat hippocampus--a semiquantitative immunocytochemical study,"
Brain Research 623(2), 329-333, 1993.

E. Tauboll and S. Lindstrom, similar article in Epilepsy Research 14(1),
17-30, 1993.

G. K. Herkes, et al., "Patterns of seizure occurrence in catamenial epilepsy,"
Epilepsy Research 15(1), 47-52, 1993. (Seizures are more frequent at
ovulation, during the two days before menstruation, and during menstruation.)

M. S. Myslobodsky, "Proconvulsant and anticonvulsant effects of stress--the
role of neuroactive steroids," Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 17(2_,
129-139, 1993. (Discusses steroid-induced sedation, excitatory steroids,
stress and epilepsy, GABA and respiratory functions, and asymmetric brain
injury.)

P. Berbel, et al., "Organization of auditory callosal connections in
hypothyroid adult rats," European J. of Neuroscience 5(11), 1465-1478,
1993.(Changes in cortical connectivity related to epilepsy associated with
early hypothyroidism.)

D. A. Marks and B. L. Ehrenberg, "Migraine-related seizures in adults with
epilepsy, with EEG correlation," Neurology 43(12), 2475-2483, 1993. ("Patients
with catamenial epilepsy and patients with migraine with aura were at an
increased risk for an association between..." migraine and epilepsy.)

R. D. Brinton, "The neurosteroid 3-alpha-hydroxy-5-alpha-pregnan-20-one
induces cytoarchitectural regression in cultured fetal hippocampal neurons,"
J. of Neuroscience 145(5 part 1), 2763-2774, 1994. J. W. Phillis and M. H.
O'Regan, "Effects of estradiol on certain cortical neurons and their responses
to adenosine," Br. Res. Bull. 20(2), 151-155, 1988.

J. O. McNamara, "Human hypoxia and seizures: Effects and interactions,"
Advances in Neurology 26, S. Fahn, et al., eds., Raven Press, N.Y., 1979.
(Seizures can cause hypoxia, etc.)

M. R. Liebowitz, et al., "Lactate provocation of panic attacks: 2. Biochemical
and physiological findings." Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 42(7), 709-719, 1985.
"Before receiving lactate, patients showed higher heart rates than controls
and also signs of hyperventilation." R. H. Mattson, et al., "Treatment of
seizures with medroxyprogesterone acetate: Preliminary report," Neurology 34,
1255-7, 1984. M. W. Newmark, et al, "Catamenial epilepsy: A review," Epilepsia
21, 281-300, 1980.

J. W. Phillis and M. H. O'Regan, "Effects of estradiol on cerebral cortex
neurons and their responses to adenosine," Br. Res. Bull. 20(2), 151-155,
1966. (Antagonism to endogenous adenosine may account for the excitant actions
of estradiol in the brain.)

J. W. Phillis, et al., "Acetylcholine output from the ischemic rat cerebral
cortex: Effects of adenosine agonists," Br. Res. 613(2), 337-340, 1993.
(Acetylcholine enhances excitotoxicity, could contribute to ischemic brain
injury.)

T. Backstrom, "Epileptic seizures in women related to plasma estrogen and
progesterone during the menstrual cycle," Acta Neurol. Scand. 54, 321-347,
1976. (Seizures are more frequent at menstruation and ovulation.) T.
Backstrom, et al., "Effects of intravenous progesterone infusion on the
epilepsy discharge frequency in women with partial epilepsy," Acta Naurol.
Scan. 69(4), 240-248, 1984.

A. W. Zimmerman, "Hormones and epilepsy," Neurol. Clin. 4(4), 853-861, 1985.
"Progesterone appears to be especially effective in treating seizures." J.
Bauer, et al., "Catamenial seizures--an analysis," Nervenarzt 66(10), 760-769,
1995. "...when anticonvulsants have failed to suppress seizures, progesterone
or progesterone-derivates have been administered with success." R. H. Mattson,
et al., "Seizure frequency and the menstrual cycle: a clinical study,"
Epilepsia 22, 242, 1981. J. Logothetis, et al., "The role of estrogens in
catamenial exacerbation of epilepsy," Neurology (Minneap) 9, 352-360, 1959. J
Laidlaw, "Catamenial epilepsy," Lancet 2, 1235-7, 1956. S. Landgren and O.
Selstam, "Interaction between 17-beta-oestradiol and 3alpha-hydroxy-5alpha
pregnane- 20-one in the control of neuronal excitability in slices from the
hippocampus in vitro of guinea-pigs and rats," Acta Physiologica Scandinavica
154(2), 165-176, 1995. C. A. Frye, "The neurosteroid 3 alpha, 5 alpha-THP has
antiseizure and possible neuroprotective effects in an animal model of
epilepsy," Brain Research 696(1-2), 113-120, 1995.

G. K. Herkes, "Drug treatment of catamenial epilepsy," CNS Drugs 3(4),
260-266, 1995. (Mentions use of diuretics, progesterone, and the very high
incidence of premenstrucal seizure, and of abnormal menstrual cycles in women
with epilepsy.)

E. Spiegel and H. Wycis, "Anticonvulsant effects of steroids," J. Lab. Clin.
Med. 33, 945-957, 1947.

G. Holmes, "Anticonvulsant effect of hormones on seizures in animals,"
265-268, in: R. Porter, R. H. Mattson, A. Ward, and M. Dam, eds., Advances in
Epileptology, 15th Epilepsy International Symposium, New York, Raven Press,
1984.

H. W. Zimmerman, et al., "Medroxyprogesterone acetate in the treatment of
seizures associated with menstruation," J. Pediatr. 83, 959-963, 1973. R. H.
Mattson, et al., "Medroxy-progesterone treatment of women with uncontrolled
seizures," Epilepsia 22, 242, 1981\. A. Rosenfield, et al., "The Food and Drug
Administration and medroxyprogesterone acetate: What are the issues?" JAMA
249, 2922-2928. 1983. V. Valenzuela and L. S. Benardo, "An in vitro model of
persistent epileptiform activity in neocortex," Epilepsy Research 21(3),
195-204, 1995. C. A. Slandley, et al., "Magnesium sulfate reduces seizures
induced by central administration of the excitatory amino acid N-methyl-D-
aspartate in rats," Hypertension in Pregnancy 14(2), 235-244, 1995.
("Magnesium is a physiological blocker of the NMDA receptor.") M. Simonale, et
al., "Adenosine JA(1) receptors in the rat brain in the kindled model of
epilepsy," Eur. J. of Pharmac. 265(3), 121-124, 1994. (Adenosine has potent
anticonvulsive effects in various seizure models.) P. S. Timiras and H. F.
Hill, Chapter 43, in Antiepileptic Drugs: Mechanisms of Action, ed. by G. H.
Glaser, et al, Raven Press, N.Y., 1980. (Estrogens increase cortical
excitability, lower convulsive thresholds, and are clearly associated with
certain cases of petit mal epilepsy. "The mechanisms of this so-called
'catamenial' epilepsy are unknown. Water retention and electrolyte changes in
the brain...have been implicated..." "...acetazolamide (diamox), a carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor and diuretic, is successful in the treatment of many cases
of these seizures, and in refractory cases progestational agents are
effective." "...seizures were more severe and frequent during the estrogen-
dominated preovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle than in the progesterone-
dominated postovulatory phase." "...ACTH may trigger epileptic convulsions by
increasing intracellular sodium concentration throughout the body."
"Progesterone can effectively reduce the frequency and severity of intractable
seizures associated with menstruation..." "Considering the markedly
proconvulsant effects of estrogens, it is surprising that the differential
effects of sex hormones on central neurotransmitter mechanisms have been only
sparingly investigated." "...estradiol decreases monoamine oxidase activity
and increases choline acetyltransferase activity in various brain regions."
"...hypothyroidism in perinatal animals has striking suppressant effects on
GABA metabolism and also causes a persistent lowering of electroconvulsive
threshold.")

P. S. Timiras and H. F. Hill, "Antiepileptic drugs," Chapter 43; E. Roberts,
"Epilepsy and antiepileptic drugs: A speculative synthesis," Chapter 44, in
Antiepileptic Drugs: Mechanisms of Action, ed. by G. H. Glaser, et al., Raven
Press, New York, 1980. E. V. Nikushkin, et al.,"Relationship between
peroxidation and phospholipase hydrolysis of lipids in synaptosomes,"
B.E.B.M.107(2)183-186, 1989. Free unsaturated fatty acids are liberated in
nerve endings and contribute to lipid peroxidation in epileptic seizures. P.
A. Long, et al., "Importance of abnormal glucose tolerance (hypoglycemia and
hyperglycemia) in the aetiology of pre-eclampsia," Lancet 1, 923-925, 1977.

M. M. Singh, "Carbohydrate metabolism in pre-eclampsia," Br. J. Obstet.
Gynaecol. 83, 124-131, 1976.

N. A. Ziboh, et al., Prostaglandins 5, 233, 1974. (Eicosatrienoic (20:3 n-9)
acid is a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthetase.) C. Galli and C.
Spagnuolo, "The release of brain free fatty acids during ischaemia in
essential fatty acid-deficient rats," J. of Neurochemistry 26, 401-404, 1976.

B. Meldrum, "Excitatory amino acids and anoxic-ischemic brain damage," Trends
Neurosci. 8, 47-48, 1985.

B. Halliwell, "Oxidants and human disease: Some new concepts," FASEB J. 1,
358-364, 1987. "...injury to the brain causes release of metal ions that
stimulate lipid peroxidation." "..lipid peroxidation...could be important in
spreading injury to adjacent cells...." P.H. Chan, et al., "Effects of
excitatory neurotransmitter amino acids on swelling of rat brain cortical
slices," J. Neurochem. 33, 1309, 1979. P. H. Chan and R. A. Fishman,
"Alterations of membrane integrity and cellular constituents by arachidonic
acid in neuroblastoma and glioma cells," Brain Res. 248, 151, 1982.

T. O. Kokate, et al., "Neuroactive steroids protect against pilocarpine- and
kainic acid-induced limbic seizures and status epilepticus in mice,"
Neuropharmacology 35(8), 1049-1056, 1996. (With a second dose, "complete
protection from the...limbic seizures and status epilepticus was obtained.")
J. W. Phillis, et al., "Effect of adenosine receptor agonist on spontaneous
and K+-evoked acetylcholine release from the in vivo rat cerebral cortex,"
Brain Res. 605(2), 293-297, 1993.

J. W. Phillis, et al., "Acetylcholine output from the ischemic rat cerebral
cortex: Effectss of adenosine agonists," Brain Res. 613(2), 337-340, 1993.
(Acetylcholine enhances excitotoxic depolarization, intracellular calcium
levels, and neural degeneration, and could contribute to ischemic brain
injury.

R. L. Grief, "Thyroid status influences calcium ion accumulation and retention
by rat liver mitochondria," Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. & Med. 189(1), 39-44, 1988.

L. G. Cleland, et al., "Effects of dietary n-9 eicosatrienoic acid on the
fatty acid composition of plasma lipid fractions and tissue plasma lipids,"
Lipids 31(8), 829-837, 1996. "Dietary enrichment with ETrA warrants further
investigation for possible beneficial effects in models of inflammation and
autoimmunity, as well as in other conditions in which mediators derived from
n-6 fatty acids can affect homeostasis adversely." A. A. Starkov, et al.,
"Regulation of the energy coupling in mitochondria by some steroid and thyroid
hormones," Bioch. Biophys. Acta 1318(1-2), 173-183, 1997\. (Thyroid and
progesterone improve respiratory efficiency, lowering oxygen consumption which
restoring energy production.) R. B. Gibbs, et al., "Effects of estrogen on
potassium stimulated acetylcholine release in the hippocampus and overlying
cortex of adult rats," Brain Res. 749(1), 143-146, 1997. (Increased response.)
I. V. Gusakov, et al., "Investigation of the role of free-radical processes in
epilepsy and epileptogenesis," Bull. Exp. Biol. & Medicine 117(2), 206, 1994.

B. K. Shakenova, "A new treatment of epilepsy resistant to traditional
antiseizure pharmacotherapy," Bull. Exp. Biol. & Medicine 117(2), 227, 1994.
(Antihypoxant with antioxidant activity.) R. N. Rzaev and M. N. Aliev, "The
use of antioxidants in the treatment of tic-accompanied hyperkineses in
children," Bull. Exp. Biol. & Medicine 117(2), 222, 1994.

D. A. Sutkovoi and N. I. Lisyanyi, "Relationship between the kinetics of lipid
peroxidation and autoimmune reactions after craniocerebral injury," Bull. Exp.
Biol. & Medicine 117(2), 2, 1994. Winfried G. Rossmanith, "Gonadotropin
secretion during aging in women: Review article," Exp. Gerontology 30(3/4)
369-381, 1995. "...major functional derangements, primarily at a hypothalamic
rather than a pituitary site, have been determined as concomitants of aging in
women." "...aging may impair the negative feedback sensitivity to ovarian sex
steroids...." Hormonal changes at menopause "may represent the sum of
functional aberrations that were initiated much earlier in life...."
"...prolonged estrogen exposure facilitates the loss of hypothalamic
neurons...."

J. R. Brawer, et al., "Ovary-dependent degeneration in the hypothalamic
arcuate nucleus," Endocrinology 107, 274-279, 1980. J. Herbert and S.
Zuckerman, "Ovarian stimulation from cerebral lesion in ferrets," J.
Endocrinology 17(4), 433-443, 1958\. G. C. Desjardins, "Estrogen-induced
hypothalamic beta-endorphin neuron loss: A possible model of hypothalamic
aging," Exp. Gerontology 30(3/4), 253-267, 1995. "This loss of opioid neurons
is prevented by treatment with antioxidants indicating that it results from
estradiol-induced formation of free radicals." "...this beta-endorphin cell
loss is followed by a compensatory upregulation of mu opioid receptors in the
vicinity of LHRH cell bodies." Resulting supersensitivity of the cells results
"in chronic opioid suppression of the pattern of LHRH release, and
subsequently that of LH." The neurotoxic effects of estradiol cause a "cascade
of neuroendocrine aberrations resulting in anovulatory acyclicity." Treatment
with an opiod antagonist "reversed the cystic morphology of ovaries and
restored normal ovarian cycles" in estrogen-treated rats. G. B. Melis, et al.,
"Evidence that estrogens inhibit LH secretion through opioids in
postmenopausal women using naloxone," Neuroendocrinology 39, 60-63, 1984.

H. J. Sipe, et al., "The metabolism of 17 beta-estradiol by lactoperoxidase: A
possible source of oxidative stress in breast cancer," Carcinogenesis 15(11),
2637-2643, 1994\. "...molecular oxygen is consumed by a sequence of reactions
initiated by the glutathione thiyl radical. ...the estradiol phenoxyl radical
abstracts hydrogen from...NADH to generate the NAD radical." "...the futile
metabolism of micromolar quantities of estradiol catalyzes the oxidation of
much greater concentrations of biochemical reducing cofactors, such as
glutathione and NADH, with hydrogen peroxide produced as a consequence." S.
Santagati, et al., "Estrogen receptor is expressed in different types of glial
cells in culture," J. Neurochem. 63(6), 2058-2064, 1994. "...in all three
types of glial cell analyzed in almost equal amounts..." D. X. Liu and L. P.
Li, "Prostaglandin F-2 alpha rises in response to hydroxyl radical generated
in vivo," Free Radical Biol. Med. 18(3), 571-576, 1995. "Free radicals and
some free fatty acids, such as arachidonic acid metabolites...may form a
feedback loop in which generation of one type leads to formation of the
other." "Prostaglandin F-2 alpha dramatically increased in response to
hydroxyl radical generation...." J. Owens and P. A. Schwartzkroin,
"Suppression of evoked IPSPs by arachidonic acid and prostaglandin F-2 alpha,"
Brain Res. 691(1-2), 223-228, 1995. "These findings suggest that high levels
of AA and its metabolites may bias neurons towards excitation." [Estrogen
appears to support this excitatory system at every level, while prostaglandin
F2 alpha alters steroid balance, by suppressing progesterone synthesis.] J. G.
Liehr, et al., "4-hydroxylation of estradiol by human uterine myometrium and
myoma microsomes: Implications for the mechanism of uterine tumorigenesis,"
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92(20), 9220-9224, 1995. "... elicits biological
activities distinct from estradiol, most notably an oxidant stress response
induced by free radicals generated by metabolic redox cycling reactions."

J. G. Liehr and D. Roy, "Free radical generation by redox cycling of
estrogens," Free Rad. Biol. Med. 8, 415-423, 1990. P. Aschheim, "Resultats
fournis par la greffe heterochrone des ovaires dan l'etude de la regulation
hypothalamo-hypophyso-ovarienne de la ratte senile," Gerontologia 10, 65-75,
1964/65. "Our last experiment, grafting ovaries...into senile rats which had
been castrated (ovariectomized) when young, and its result, the appearance of
estrous cycles, seems explicable by this hypothesis. Everything happens as if
the long absence of ovarian hormones... had kept the cells of the hypothalamus
in the state of youth. It's as if the messages of the circulating steroids
fatigued the hypothalamic memory." "What are the factors that cause this
diminution of the hypothalamic sensitivity...? Kennedy incriminates a decrease
in the cellular metabolism in general...."

P. Ascheim, "Aging in the hypothalamic-hypophyseal-ovarian axis in the rat,"
pp. 376-418 in: A. V. Everitt and J. A. Burgess, editors, Hypothalamus,
Pituitary and Aging, C. C. Thomas, Springfield, 1976. C. A. Frye and J. D.
Sturgis, "Neurosteroids affect spatial reference, working, and long-term
memory of female rats," Neurobiol. Learn. Memory 64(1), 83-96, 1995\. [Female
rats take longer to acquire a spatial task during behavioral estrus.] (CA
Frye, boston univ., dept biol, behavioral neurosci lab, boston 02215) "Estrus-
associated decrements in a water maze task are limited to acquisition,"
Physiol. Behav. 57(1), 5-14, 1995.

C. A. Kristensen, et al., "Effect of estrogen withdrawal on energy-rich
phosphates and prediction of estrogen-dependence monitored by in vivo 31P
magnetic resonance spectoscopy of four human breast cancer xenografts," Cancer
Research 55(8), 1664-1669, 1995. This is a very important confirmation of the
idea that estrogen, by blocking energy, constrains cell function.

A. J. Roberts and L. D. Keith, "Corticosteroids enhance convulsion
susceptibility via central mineralocorticoid receptors,"
Psychoneuroendocrinology 20(8), 891-902, 1995\. ("...increase corticosterone
levels are associated with increased severity of ethanol, pentobarbitol, and
diazepam withdrawal. Further work with chemical convulsants suggests that
mineralocorticoid receptors mediate excitatory effects of corticosteroids on
convulsion susceptibility. The circadian rhythm in convulsion susceptibility
varies with the circadian rhythm of plasma corticosterone levels and MR
binding." "...MR are substantially bound at rest and maximally occupied during
the circadian peak in corticosteroid levels and during stressor exposure,
these receptors are implicated in the maintenance of and in changes in the
arousal state of animals.") L. Murri, et al., "Neuroendocrine evaluation in
catamenial epilepsy," Funct. Neurol. 1(4) 399-403, 1986. "Our data showed a
reduction of luteal phase progesterone secretion; an imbalanced secretion of
ovarian steroids plays a role in the catamenial exacerbation of epilepsy." S.
Bag, et al., "Pregnancy and epilepsy," J. Neurol. 236(5), 311-313, 1989.

"Patients with increased seizure frequency had significantly higher oestrogen
levels, lower level of progesterone...." "...abortions and status epilepticus
had high serum oestrogen levels." M. I. Balabolkin, et al., "The role of the
female sex hormones in the pathogenesis of catamenial epileptic seizures,"
Ter. Arkh. 66(4), 68-71, 1994. "...a tendency to deficient luteal phase and
relative hyperestrogenemia in all the cycle phases." C. A. Guerreiro,
"Ovulatory period and epileptic crisis," Arq. Neuropsiquiatr. 49(2), 198-203,
1991. "We think the estrogen peak is probably the main cause of the increased
frequency of epileptic seizures during the ovulatory period."

U. Bonuccelli, et al., "Unbalanced progesterone and estradiol secretion in
catamenial epilepsy," Epilepsy Res. 3(2), 100-106, 1989. (Luteal secretion
ratio, progesterone to estrogen, was significantly reduced in patients versus
controls.)

T. Backstrom, "Epilepsy in women," Experientia 32(2), 248-249, 1976. "...a
significant positive correlation between estrogen/progesterone ratio and
scores of fits."

A. G. Herzog, "Hormonal changes in epilepsy," Epilepsia 36(4), 323-326, 1995.
A. G. Herzog, "Progesterone therapy in women with partial and secondary
generalized seizures," Neurology 45(9), 1660-1662, 1995. A. G. Herzog,
"Reproductive endocrine considerations and hormonal therapy for women with
epilepsy," Epilepsia 32(Suppl.6), S27-33, 1991. "Seizure frequency varies with
the serum estradiol to progesterone ratio." "... propensity for onset at
menarch and exacerbation of seizures during the months or years leading up to
menopause..." polycystic ovarian syndrome and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
are significantly overrepresented among women with epilepsy.

R.H. Mattson and J. A. Cramer, "Epilepsy, sex hormones, and antiepileptic
drugs," Epilepsia 26(Suppl. 1), S40-51, 1985. There were fewer seizures during
the luteal phase but they increased when the progesterone level declined.

J.J. Jacono and J. M. Robertson, "The effects of estrogen, progesterone, and
ionized calcium on seizures during the menstrual cycle of epileptic women,"
Epilepsia 28(5), 571-577, 1987. A positive relation of serum estrogen and
seizures, negative relation between serum ionized calcium and seizures, and
negative relation between serum estrogen and calcium. F. E. Jensen, et al.,
"Epileptogenic effect of hypoxia in the immature rodent brain," Ann. Neurol.
29(6),629-836, 1991\. E. C. Wirrell, et al., "Will a critical level of
hyperventilation-induced hypocapnia always induce an absence seizure?"
Epilepsia 37(5), 459-462, 1996. A. Nehlig, et al., "Absence seizures induce a
decrease in cerebral blood flow: Human and animal data," J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 16(1), 147-155, 1996.

Some clinical laboratory findings in epilepsy: Folic acid, serum decrease, R.
E. Davis, et al., "Serum pyridoxal, folate, and vitamin B12 levels in
institutionalized epileptics," Epilepsia 16, 463-8, 1975.

Serum GGT, constantly elevated. Ewen and Griffiths, "Gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase: Elevated activities in certain neurologic diseases," Am. J.
Clin. Pathol. 59, 2-9, 1973.

IgA, CSF decreased, F. Mora, et al.

Iron-binding capacity, total, serum decrease. F. Mora, et al. Magnesium,
serum, decreased; between seizures. C S Babel, et al Prealbumin, CSF,
increased, the only protein to increase in epileptics. F. Mora, et al.

Pyridoxine, serum, sometimes decreased. R. L. Searcy, Diagnostic Biochemistry,
McGraw-Hill, 1969.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

