A R T I C L E Estriol, DES, DDT, etc. A review of the use of estrogens
reported in J.A.M.A. (only up to 1987) found nearly 200 different
"indications" for its use. (Palmlund, 1996.) Using the conservative language
of that journal, such use could be said to constitute wildly irresponsible
"empirical" medical practice. More appropriate language could be used.
Pollution of the environment and food supply by estrogenic chemicals is
getting increased attention. Early in the study of estrogens, it was noticed
that soot, containing polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, was both estrogenic
and carcinogenic. Since then, it has been found that phenolics and chlorinated
hydrocarbons are significantly estrogenic, and that many estrogenic
herbicides, pesticides, and industrial by-products persist in the environment,
causing infertility, deformed reproductive organs, tumors, and other
biological defects, including immunodeficiency. In the Columbia River, a
recent study found that about 25% of the otters and muskrats were anatomically
deformed. Estrogenic pollution kills birds, panthers, alligators, old men,
young women, fish, seals, babies, and ecosystems. Some of these chemicals are
sprayed on forests by the US Department of Agriculture, where they enter
lakes, underwater aquifers, rivers, and oceans. Private businesses spray them
on farms and orchards, or put them into the air as smoke or vapors, or dump
them directly into rivers. Homeowners put them on their lawns and gardens.
Natural estrogens, from human urine, enter the rivers from sewage. Many tons
of synthetic and pharmaceutical estrogens, administered to menopausal women in
quantities much larger than their bodies ever produced metabolically, are
being added to the rivers. In the same way that weak estrogens in the
environment may become hundreds of times more estrogenic by synergistic
interactions (J. A. McLachlan, et al., Science, June 7, 1996), combinations of
natural, medical, dietary, and environmental estrogens are almost certain to
have unexpected results. The concept of a "protective estrogen" is very
similar to the idea of "protective mutagens" or "protective carcinogens,"
though in the case of estrogens, their promoters don't even know what the
normal, natural functions of estrogen are. In November, 1995, an international
conference was held to study the problem of "Environmental endocrine-
disrupting chemicals," and to devise strategies for increasing public
awareness of the seriousness of the problem. Their "Statement from the work
session" says "New evidence is especially worrisome because it underscores the
exquisite sensitivity of the developing nervous system to chemical
perturbations that result in functional abnormalities." "This work session was
convened because of the growing concern that failure to confront the problem
could have major economic and societal implications." "We are certain of the
following: Endocrine-disrupting chemicals can undermine neurological and
behavioral development and subsequent potential of individuals...." "Because
the endocrine system is sensitive to perturbation, it is a likely target for
disturbance." "Man-made endocrine-disrupting chemicals range across all
continents and oceans. They are found in native populations from the Arctic to
the tropics, and, because of their persistence in the body, can be passed from
generation to generation." "...many endocrine-disrupting contaminants, even if
less potent than the natural products, are present in living tissue at
concentrations millions of times higher than the natural hormones." "The
developing brain exhibits specific and often narrow windows during which
exposure to endocrine disruptors can produce permanent changes in its
structure and function." In spite of this increased exposure to estrogens,
there is a new wave of advertising of estrogenic substances, based on the idea
that weak estrogens will provide protection against strong estrogens. The
environmental background of estrogenic pollution already provides a continuous
estrogenic exposure. In the 1940s, Alexander Lipshuts demonstrated that a
continuous, weak estrogenic stimulus was immensely effective in producing,
first fibromas, then cancer, in one organ after another, and the effect was
not limited to the reproductive system. How is it possible that the idea of
"protection" from a weak estrogen seems convincing to so many? Isn't this the
same process that we saw when the nuclear industry promoted Luckey's doctrine
of "radiation hormesis," literally the claim that "a little radiation is
positively good for us"? DES (diethyl stilbestrol) is one of the most
notorious estrogens, because studies in humans revealed that its use during
pregnancy not only caused cancer, miscarriages, blood clots, etc., in the
women who used it, but also caused cancer, infertility, and deformities in
their children, and even in their grandchildren. (But those transgenerational
effects are not unique to it.) Besides the absurd use of DES to prevent
miscarriages, around 1950 it was also used to treat vulvovaginitis in little
girls, for menstrual irregularity at puberty, to treat sterility,
dysfunctional bleeding, endometriosis, amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea,
dysmenorrhea, migraine headaches, nausea and vomiting, and painful breast
engorgement or severe bleeding after childbirth. DES is a "weak" estrogen, in
the sense that it doesn't compete with natural estrogens for the "estrogen
receptors." (Estriol binds more strongly to receptors than DES does:
"Cytosolic and nuclear estrogen receptors in the genital tract of the rhesus
monkey," J. Steroid Bioch. 8(2), 151-155, 1977.) Pills formerly contained from
5 to 250 mg. of DES. The 1984 PDR lists doses for hypogonadism and ovarian
failure as 0.2 to 0.5 mg. daily. In general, dosage of estrogens decreased by
a factor of 100 after the 1960s. An aggressively stupid editorial by Alvin H.
Follingstad, from the Jan. 2, 1978, issue of JAMA, pages 29-30, "Estriol, the
forgotten estrogen?" is being circulated to promote the use of estriol, or the
phytoestrogens. It argues that women who secrete larger amounts of estriol are
resistant to cancer. By some tests, estriol is a "weak estrogen," by others it
is a powerful estrogen. When estriol was placed in the uterus of a rabbit,
only 1.25 mcg. was sufficient to prevent implantation and destroy the
blastocyst. (Dmowski, et al., 1977.) Since the effect was local, the body
weight of the animal doesn't make much difference, when thinking about the
probable effect of a similar local contentration of the hormone on human
tissues. The anti-progestational activity of estriol and estradiol are
approximately the same. (Tamotsu and Pincus, 1958.) When 5 mg. of estriol was
given to women intravaginally, this very large dose suppressed LH within 2
hours, and suppressed FSH in 5 hours. Given orally, 8 mg. had similar effects
on LH and FSH after 30 days, and also had an estrogenic effect on the vaginal
epithelium.. These quick systemic effects of a "weak estrogen" are essentially
those of a strong estrogen, except for the size of the dose. (Schiff, et al.,
1978.) When administered subcutaneously, estriol induced abortions and
stillbirths (Velardo, et al.) Another indication of the strength of an
estrogen is its ability to cause the uterus to enlarge. Estriol is slightly
weaker, in terms of milligrams required to cause a certain rate of uterine
enlargement, than estradiol. (Clark, et al., 1979.) But isn't the important
question whether or not the weak estrogen imitates all of the effects of
estradiol, including carcinogenesis and blood clotting, in addition to any
special harmful effects it might have? When added to long-term culture of
human breast cancer cells, estriol stimulated their growth, and overcame the
antiestrogenic effects of tamoxifen, even at concentrations hundreds of times
lower than that of tamoxifen. "The data do not support an antiestrogenic role
for estriol in human breast cancer." (Lippman, et al., 1977.) Studies of the
urinary output of estriol/estradiol in women with or without breast cancer do
not reliably show the claimed association between low estriol/estradiol and
cancer, and the stimulating effect of estriol on the growth of cancer cells
suggests that any alteration of the estrogen ratio is likely to be a
consequence of the disease, rather than a cause. The conversion of estradiol
to other estrogens occurs mainly in the liver, in the non-pregnant woman, as
does the further metabolism of the estrogens into glucuronides and sulfates.
The hormonal conditions leading to and associated with breast cancer all
affect the liver and its metabolic systems. The hydroxylating enzymes are also
affected by toxins. Hypothyroidism (low T3), low progesterone, pregnenolone,
DHEA, etiocholanolone, and high prolactin, growth hormone, and cortisol are
associated with the chronic high estrogen and breast cancer physiologies, and
modify the liver's regulatory ability. The decreased output of hormones when
the fetal-placental system is dying is a natural consequence, since the
placenta produces hormones, and during pregnancy converts estradiol to
estriol. Since estradiol in excess kills the fetus, its conversion by the
placenta to estriol is in accord with the evidence showing that estriol is the
more quickly excreted form. (G. S. Rao, 1973.) The conversion of 16-hydroxy
androstenedione and 16-hydroxy-DHEA into estriol by the placenta (Vega Ramos,
1973) would also cause fetal exhaustion or death to result in lower estriol
production. But a recent observation that a surge of estriol production
precedes the onset of labor, and that its premature occurrence can identify
women at risk of premature delivery (McGregor, et al., 1995) suggests that the
estriol surge might reflect the mother's increased production of adrenal
androgens during stress. (This would be analogous to the situation in the
polycystic ovary syndrome, in which excessive estradiol drives the adrenals to
produce androgens.) Estetrol, which has one more hydroxyl group than estriol,
is a "more sensitive and reliable indicator of fetal morbidity than estriol
during toxemic pregnancies," because it starts to decrease earlier, or
decreases more, than estriol. (Kundu, et al., 1978.) This seems to make it
even clearer that the decline of estriol is a consequence, not a cause, of
fetal sickness or death. A 1994 publication (B. Zumoff, "Hormonal profiles in
women with breast cancer," Obstet. Gynecol. Clin. North. Am. (U.S.) 21(4),
751-772) reported that there are four hormonal features in women with breast
cancer: diminished androgen production, luteal inadequacy, increased
16-hydroxylation of estradiol, and increased prolactin. The 16-hydroxylation
converts estradiol into estriol. A new technique for radiographically locating
a hormone-dependent breast cancer is based on the fact that estriol-sulfate is
a major metabolite of estradiol. The technique showed the tumor to have about
a six times higher concentration of estriol-sulfate than liver or muscle. (N.
Shimura, et al., "Specific imaging of hormone-dependent mammary carcinoma in
nude mice with [131I]-anti-estriol 3-sulfate antibody," Nucl. Med. Biol.
(England) 22(5), 547-553, 1995.) Another association of elevated conversion of
estradiol to estriol with disease was found to occur in men who had a
myocardial infarction, compared to controls who hadn't. (W. S. Bauld, et al.,
1957.) The estrogens in clover have been known for several decades to have a
contraceptive action in sheep, and other phytoestrogens are known to cause
deformities in the genitals, feminization of men, and anatomical changes in
the brain as well as functional masculinization of the female brain.
(Register, et al., 1995; Levy, et al, 1995; Clarkson, et al., 1995; Gavaler,
et al., 1995.) The effects of the phytoestrogens are very complex, because
they modify the sensitivity of cells to natural estrogens, and also modify the
metabolism of estrogens, with the result that the effects on a given tissue
can be either pro-estrogenic and anti-estrogenic. For example, the flavonoids,
naringenin, quercetin and kaempherol (kaempherol is an antioxidant, a
phytoestrogen, and a mutagen) modify the metabolism of estradiol, causing
increased bioavailability of both estrone and estradiol. (W. Schubert, et al.,
"Inhibition of 17-beta-estradiol metabolism by grapefruit juice in
ovariectomized women," Maturitas (Ireland) 30(2-3), 155-163, 1994.) Why do
plants make phytoestrogens? There is some information indicating that these
compounds evolved to regulate the plants' interactions with other organisms--
to attract bacteria, or to repel insects, for example, rather than just as
pigment-forming materials. (Baker, 1995.) The fact that some of them bind to
our "estrogen receptors" is probably misleading, because of their many other
effects, including inhibiting enzyme functions involved in the regulation of
steroids and prostaglandins. Their biochemistry in animals is much more
complicated than that of natural estrogens, which is itself so complicated
that we can only guess what the consequences might be when we change the
concentration and the ratio of substances in that complex system. (See
quotation from Velardo, et al., page 6) These "natural" effects in sheep were
forerunners of the observed estrogenic effects in wild animals, caused by
pollutants. Twenty-five years ago I reviewed many of the issues of estrogen's
toxicity, and the ubiquity of estrogenic substances, and since then have
regularly spoken about it, but I haven't concentrated much attention on the
phytoestrogens, because we can usually just choose foods that are relatively
free of them. They are so often associated with other food toxins--antithyroid
factors, inhibitors of digestive enzymes, immunosuppressants, etc.--that the
avoidance of certain foods is desirable. Recently an advocate of soybeans said
"if they inhibit the thyroid, why isn't there an epidemic of hypothyroidism in
Asia?" I happened to hear this right after seeing newspaper articles about
China's problem with 100,000,000 cretins; yes, Asia has endemic
hypothyroidism, and beans are widely associated with hypothyroidism. When I
first heard about clover-induced miscarriages in sheep, I began reading about
the subject, because it was relevant to the work I was doing at that time on
reproductive aging. Sheep which are adapted to living at high altitude, where
all animals have reduced fertility, have an adaptive type of hemoglobin, with
a greater affinity for oxygen. Fetal hemoglobin, in animals at sea-level, has
a great affinity for oxygen, making it possible for the fetus to get enough
oxygen, despite its insulation from the mother's direct blood supply. The
high-altitude-tolerant sheep have hemoglobin which is able to deliver
sufficient oxygen to the uterus to meet the needs of the embryo/fetus, even
during relative oxygen-deprivation. These sheep are able to sustain pregnancy
while grazing on clover. It seemed evident that estrogen and high altitude had
something in common, namely, oxygen deprivation, and it also seemed evident
that these sheep provided the explanation for estrogen's abortifacient
effects. Estrogen's effects, ranging from shock to cancer, all seem to relate
to an interference with the use of oxygen. Different estrogens have different
affinities for various tissues, and a given substance is likely to have
effects other than estrogenicity, and the presence of other substances will
modify the way a tissue responds, but the stressful shift away from oxidative
production of energy is the factor that all estrogens have in common.
Otherwise, how could suffocation and x-irradiation have estrogenic effects?
Pharmaceutical misrepresentations regarding the estrogens rank, in terms of
human consequences, with the radiation damage from fall-out from bomb tests
and reactor-leaks, with industrial pollution, with degradation of the food
supply--with genocide, in fact. Advertising gets a bad name when it can't be
distinguished from mass murder. At a certain point, we can't afford to waste
our time making subtle distinctions between ignorance and malevolence. If we
begin pointing out the lethal consequences of "stupid" or quasi-stupid commer-
cial/governmental policies, the offenders will have the burden of proving that
their actions are the result of irresponsible ignorance, rather than criminal
duplicity. From the tobacco senators to the
chemical/pharmaceutical/food/energy industries and their agents in the
governmental agencies, those who do great harm must be held responsible. The
idea of corporate welfare, in which public funds are given in massive
subsidies to rich corporations, is now generally recognized. Next, we have to
increase our consciousness of corporate responsibility, and that ordinary
criminal law, especially RICO, can be directly applied to corporations. It
remains to be seen whether a government can be made to stop giving public
funds to corporations, and instead, to begin enforcing the law against them--
and against those in the agencies who participated in their crimes. In the
U.S., the death penalty is sometimes reserved for "aggravated homicide." If
those who kill hundreds of thousands for the sake of billions of dollars in
profits are not committing aggravated homicide, then it must be that no law
written in the English language can be objectively interpreted, and the legal
system is an Alice in Wonderland convenience for the corporate state.
Copyright: Raymond Peat, PhD 1997 PO Box 5764 Eugene, OR 97405 REFERENCES Dr.
Bernard Weiss, Dept. of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School
of Medicine, Rochester, NY. and 17 others, work session on environmental
endocrine-disrupting chemicals, Nov. 5-10, 1995. Isaac Schiff, et al.,
"Effects of estriol administration on the hypogonadal woman," Fertil. Steril.
30(3), 278-282, 1978. N. P. J. Kundu, et al., "Sequential determination of
serum human placental lactogen, estriol, and estetrol for assessment of fetal
morbidity," Obstet. Gynecol. 52(5), 513-520, 1978. M. E. Lieberman, et al.,
"Estrogen control of prolactin synthesis in vitro," P.N.A.S. (USA) 75(12),
5946-5949, 1978. Marc Lippman, et al., "Effects of estrone, estradiol and
estriol on hormone-responsive human breast cancer in long term tissue
culture," Cancer Res. 37(6), 1901-1907, 1977. W. P. Dmowski, et al., "Effect
of intrauterine estriol on reproductive function in the rabbit," Fertil.
Steril. 28(3), 262-8, 1977. W. S. Bauld, et al, "Abnormality of estrogen
metabolism in human subjects with myocardial infarction," Canadian Jour.
Biochem. and Physiol. 35(12), 1277-1288, 1957. (The conversion of estradiol to
estriol was higher in men with previous myocardial infarction than in
controls.) R. A. Edgren and D. W. Calhoun, "Interaction of estrogens on the
vaginal smear of spayed rats," Am. J. Physiol. 189(2), 355-357, 1957.
"Employing the vaginal smear as an index of effect, combinations of various
estrogenic substances were tested for interaction. Studies were concentrated
at the approximate 50% response level." "These data are interpreted as
indicating simple additive relationships among the compounds tested."
"Curiously then, estrogens that showed inhibitory interrelationships when
tested on uterine growth had simple additive interactions when tested on the
vaginal smears." "...it seems reasonable to postulate that a given hormone
combination may evoke differing levels of response in different target organs,
and particularly, that increase of one component may increase response at one
site while decreasing it at another. Many steroids...are present in the
mammalian circulation during various phases of the sex cycle and are known to
modify the effects of any given estrogen. This hormonal multiplicity
apparently constitutes an estrogen-buffering system and supports the
hypothesis that sexual responses depend '...upon a rather precise hormonal
homeostasis.'" R. C. Merrill, "Estriol: A review," Physiol. Revs. 38(3),
463-480, 1958. "...estriol itself is a potent estrogen, contrary to the usual
conception of its being just a metabolite of the more potent estrone and
estradiol. Although ordinarily less effective than estrone and estradiol in
promoting vaginal cornification, estriol, under optimum conditions, approaches
their effectiveness for this purpose. Estriol is more potent than estrone or
estradiol in causing establishment and opening of the vaginal orifice, in
promoting imbibition of uterine fluid, in increasing lactic dehydrogenase
activity in the uterus, and in stimulating mitotic activity in the epidermis
of the mouse ear. The activity of estriol is of the same order of magnitude as
that of estrone and estradiol in other estrogenic actions, such as to promote
uterine growth at low concentrations (although less effective at high doses),
to increase beta-glucuronidase and reduced diphosphopyridine nucleotide
oxidase activity in the uterus, to reduce motility of the uterus in vivo, and
to stimulate ovarian growth, body weight, phagocytosis of carbon by
reticuloendothelial cells, ciliary movements of the buccopharyngeal mucose of
the frog, and new bone formation. The fibromatogenic activity of estriol in
the guinea pig is much less than that of estrone or estradiol. Recent
experiments suggest and partly verify the hypothesis that estriol stimulates
the cervix, vagina and vulva more effectively than estrone or estradiol,
whereas the latter are much more effective on the corpus uteri." T. Miyake and
G. Pincus, "Anti-progestational activity of estrogens in rabbit endometrium,"
Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. and Med. 99(2) 478-482, 1958. "The anti-progestational
activity of 4 estrogens--estrone, estradiol, estriol, and stilbestrol--
administered subcutaneously with progesterone into Clauberg rabbits has been
demonstrated...." "The anti-progestational activities of these estrogens are
approximately the same." "...estrogen may depress reactivity of the
endometrium to progesterone rather than neutralize or inactivate progesterone
in the body." J. T. Velardo, et al., "Effect of various steroids on gestation
and litter size in rats," Fertility and Sterility 7(4), 301-311, 1956.
"...certain metabolites of estrogenic and progestative substances that were
previously considered to be 'weak' or inert may well play a role in the
reproductive process." "We have been impressed with the probability that any
endocrine receptor-organ response is not accomplished by the independent
action of one hormone alone. It appears more likely that such response is the
physiological expression of the sum total of the biologic hormones and their
metabolites in concert on the receptor organs." "The effect of estriol on the
birth rate of these rats was more dramatic." "...when estriol was used before
mating, it reduced the litter size to 66 per cent of the controls." "However,
when the same dose was employed from the day of mating and daily thereafter
beyond the time of usual implantation, 6 days later, a reduction of live
births to 33 per cent of the controls was produced. In this experiment the
medication was withheld until after ovulation had presumably occurred. The
presence of placental scars and an increased incidence of abortions and
stillbirths argues against the possibility that the fertile ova have been
'locked' by the estrogen in the tubes." "...the incidence of placental scars,
abortions, and stillbirths further bears witness to the possibility that the
steroids employed interfered with the optimum differentiation of
progestational endometrial changes, rather than affecting any suppression of
ovulatory mechanisms." B. Register, et al., "Effect of neonatal exposure to
diethylstilbestrol, coumestrol, and beta-sitosterol on pituitary
responsiveness and sexually dimorphic nucleus volume," P.S.E.B.M. 208, 72,
1995. J. R. Levy, et al., "Effect of prenatal exposure to the phytoestrogen
genistein on sexual differentiation in rats," P.S.E.B.M. 208, 60, 1995. B.D.
Lyn-Cook, et al., "Methylation profile and amplification of proto-oncogenes in
rat pancreas induced with phytoestrogens," PSEBM 208, 116, 1995. J. S.
Gavaler, et al., "Phytoestrogen congeners of alcoholic beverages: Current
status,: PSEBM 208, 98, 1995. A. I. Nwannenna, et al., "Clinical changes in
ovariectomized ewes exposed to phytoestrogens and 17beta-estradiol implants,"
PSEBM 208, 92, 1995. P. L. Whitten, et al., "Influence of phytoestrogen diets
on estradiol action in the rat uterus," Steroids 59, 443-449, 1994.
"Coumestrol did not antagonize the uterotrophic action of estradiol when
administered either prior to, or jointly with, E2 treatment, or when
administered orally or parenterally." "These findings contradict the
assumption that all phytoestrogens are necessarily antiproliferative
agents...." M. E. Baker, "Endocrine activity of plant-derived compounds: An
evolutionary perspective," PSEBM 208, 131, 1995. I. Palmlund, "To cell from
environment," Chapter 19 in Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Hormonal
Carcinogenesis, published by Wiley-Liss. J. H. Clark, et al., "Nuclear binding
of the estrogen receptor: Heterogeneity of sites and uterotropic response,"
Steroid Hormone Receptor Systems, page 17, 1979. P. Vega Ramos, et al.,
"Formation of oestriol from C19, 16-oxygenated steroids by microsomal
preparations of human placenta," Res. on Steroids, vol. V, page 79, Proc. of
the Fifth Meeting of the International Study Group for Steroid Hormones,
edited by M. Finkelstein, et al., 1973. G. S. Rao, "Enzymes in steroid
metabolism," Res. on Steroids, vol. V, page 175, 1973. L. H. Carter and C. B.
Harrington, Administrative Law and Politics HarperCollins, 1991. "Capture
occurs when agencies informally promote the very interests they are officially
responsible for regulating." In 1925, Coolidge's appointment of "anti-public"
W. E. Humphrey to the FTC led some of its former supporters to call for the
abolition of the FTC. "If nearly a century of regulatory history tells us
anything, it is that the rules-making agencies of government are almost
invariably captured by the industries which they are established to control."
Robert Heilbroner, In the Name of Profit, 1972, p. 239. "Federal economic
regulation was generally designed by the regulated interest to meet its own
end, and not those of the public or the commonweal." Gabriel Kolko, The
Triumph of Conservatism: A Reinterpretation of American History, 1900-1916,
1963. "It is a given in the modern doctrine of most tort laws that the
existence of potential liability if anything encourages citizens to use
greater thoughtfulness and care in their daily actions, and no obvious reasons
suggest the same dynamic should not affect public officials." Adm. Law. &
Pols., p. 404. "That Congress decided, after the passage of the Fourteenth
Amendment, to enact legislation specifically requiring state officials to
respond in federal court for their failures to observe the constitutional
limitations on their powers is hardly a reason for excusing their federal
counterparts for the identical constitutional transgressions." "In situations
of abuse, an action for damages against the responsible official can be an
important means of vindicating constitutional guarantees...." Justice White,
Butz v. Economou, p. 409, Adm. Law & Pols. Ray Peat's Newsletter Not for
republication without written permission. Copyright 1997 Raymond Peat P.O. Box
5764, Eugene, OR 97405 What we call inflammation offers a good conceptual link
between the studies on excitotoxicity or cellular stress, and the newer
approaches to the treatment of aging and degenerative diseases, based on ideas
of regeneration and development. Controlling inflammation becomes part of
promoting regeneration.. Apoptosis is a type of cell death in which the cell
appears to melt, with the DNA being cut into short fragments. It can be
considered to be the end result of an extreme excitotoxic process. It should
serve to stimulate nearby cells. As the result of industrial promotion,
including product advertising and grants for research, "weak estrogens" and
"antioxidants" derived from soy are being discussed as means to prevent breast
and prostate cancer, heart disease, stress and aging. Another so-called weak
estrogen, estriol, is being promoted by drug companies for the "alternative
medical" market, with the circulation of an editorial from JAMA, recommending
it for preventing breast cancer. Japanese women used to be very free of breast
cancer, and when their children grew up in the U.S., their incidence of the
disease was like that of Americans. How odd that the soybean should be singled
out for responsibility. Japanese breast cancer incidence has risen sharply in
recent years. Did they stop eating tofu? Did their traditional use of seaweed
as food have nothing to do with their health? Did the traditional home-bound
isolation of Japanese women, their avoidance of smoking and drinking, have no
effect on hormones and cancer? Their calorie intake? Iodine and trace
minerals? What types of protein and fat, in what quantities, did they use? ^^^
Top ^^^

