![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Estrogen and brain aging in men and women: Depression, energy, stress**  

Although the incidence of Alzheimer's disease is 2 or 3 times as high among
women as among men, there is a major campaign under way to convince the public
that taking estrogen supplements will prevent the disease. Estrogen is now
mainly promoted to prevent osteoporosis (another problem that is more common
in women) and heart disease (which is more common in men).

This substance, which came into medical use as "the female hormone" for the
treatment of "female problems," especially for improving fertility, and then
for preventing fertility as the oral contraceptive, is now being aimed
primarily at the post-reproductive population, for problems that are
essentially unrelated to femininity. It is, in fact, being presented to the
public as something to prevent major age-related conditions.

Brain degeneration, like osteoporosis, takes years to develop. Analysis of
letters written by young women, for example, showed limited mental functioning
in those who many years later developed Alzheimer's disease, and young women
who have small bones are the ones most likely to develop osteoporosis later.
**It seems clear that the course of degenerative aging processes is set in
young adulthood (or even earlier), and that it is never too early to be
concerned with correcting processes that are going in the wrong direction.**
(See Walker, et al., 1988, and Smith, et al., 1992.)

In "The Biological Generality of Progesterone" (1979) I proposed that the
life-long trajectory of energy production and longevity was strongly
influenced by prenatal nutrition and progesterone. This idea was based on work
by people such as Marion Diamond, who showed that prenatal progesterone
enlarges the cortex of the brain, and that estrogen makes it smaller, and
Leonell Strong, who showed that a treatment that lowered the estrogen function
in a young mouse could produce cancer-free offspring for several generations.
Strong's work was very encouraging, because it showed that biological problems
that had been "bred in" over many generations could be corrected by some
simple metabolic treatments.

Seeing these profoundly toxic long-range effects of estrogen, which shaped the
animal's growth, development, function, and even its heredity, made it
important to learn how estrogen works, because such fundamental changes
covering the whole range of biology, produced by a simple little molecule,
promised to reveal interesting things about the nature of life.  

Aging is an energy problem, and in the brain, which has extremely high energy
requirements, interference with the energy supply quickly causes cells to die.

I believe that estrogen's "principle," in all of its actions, is to interfere
with the respiratory mode of energy production. This is an integrating
principle that explains estrogen's immediate, direct effects on cells and
organisms, which aren't explained by the idea that it acts on the genes
through a specific "estrogen receptor." (It's hard to imagine, for example,
how the "estrogen receptor" doctrine could explain the fact that a single
injection of estrogen can kill a large portion of brain cells.) It explains
why estrogen causes cells to take up water, allowing calcium to enter,
activating various enzymes and cell division. On the organismic level, it
explains why estrogen mimics "shock," releasing histamine and activating the
nervous and glandular stress response system. The inefficiency of metabolism
which doesn't use oxygen in the normal way causes glucose to be used rapidly,
and this in itself is enough to trigger the release of pituitary ACTH and
adrenal cortisol. The ACTH, and related hormones, liberate free fatty acids,
which cells take up instead of glucose, and this (in the so-called Randall
cycle) further limits the body's ability to oxidize glucose.  

People have spoken of "cascades" in relation to the adrenal glucocorticoids
(e.g., cortisol) and estrogen, leading to cell damage, but really both of
these hormonal cascades have to be seen as part of a more general collapse of
adaptive systems, as a result of both chronic and immediate inadequacies of
energy production.  

**Estrogen activates the adrenal stress reaction by way of the hypothalamus
and pituitary, by direct actions on the adrenal glands, and by a variety of
indirect effects, such as the increase of free fatty acids. It activates the
excitotoxic glutamic acid pathway, and interferes with protective adenosine
inhibition of nerves. It has both direct and indirect ways of promoting the
formation of nitric oxide and carbon monoxide. These, and other estrogen-
promoted factors, quickly and seriously interfere with mitochondrial
respiration. Many of these effects contribute to increased intracellular
calcium and free radical production, contributing to both the excitatory
excess and the energy deficit.**  

The biochemical details of these cascades are mainly interesting because they
show how many different kinds of stress converge on a few physiological
processess--mitochondrial energy production, cellular excitation, and
intercellular communication--which, when damaged thousands of times, lead to
the familiar states of old age. These few functions, damaged by an infinite
variety of stresses, have their own complexly adaptive ways of deteriorating,
producing the various degenerative diseases.

This perspective brings dementia, heart failure, autoimmunity,
immunodeficiency and other diseases of aging together, in ways that allow
generalized therapeutic and preventive approaches.

The antistress, antiestrogen approaches become fundamental to prevention of
aging.

The pro-estrogenic nature of the unsaturated fatty acids is probably the
biggest barrier to the radical elimination of degenerative diseases. Various
saturated fatty acids, including butyric, octanoic, and palmitic, have
protective effects on mitochondrial respiration.

**Progesterone is the basic brain-protective antiestrogen. It works to protect
the brain at many levels (preventing lipid peroxidation, exitotoxicity, nitric
oxide damage, energy deficit, edema, etc.) and it promotes repair and
recovery.**

Progesterone in most cases has effects opposite to estrogen's, improving
mitochondrial energy production while preventing excessive excitation. Along
with pregnenolone, progesterone is recognized as a neurosteroid with anti-
excitotoxic actions, with the ability to promote repair and regeneration of
the nervous system. (Roof, Stein, Faden; Schumacher, et al.; Baulieu.)

The use of aspirin, which reduces inflammation and inhibits the formation of
neurotoxic prostaglandins, is known to be associated with a lower incidence of
Alzheimer's disease, and in other contexts, it offers protection against
estrogen. Naloxone, the antiendorphin, has been found to reverse some of the
cumulative effects of stress, restoring some pituitary and ovarian function,
and it promotes recovery after brain injury **;** in a variety of ways, it
corrects some of estrogen's toxic effects.

Adenosine helps to maintain brain glycogen stores, which are lost in stress
and aging. Vitamin B12 protects against nitric oxide, and improves alertness.

Pyruvic acid has brain-protective effects, apparently through its
decarboxylation (producing carbon dioxide) rather than through its use as an
energy source, since other ketoacids are similarly protective. (The ketoacids
occur in some natural foods.) The directly brain-protective effect of carbon
dioxide offers many clues that should be interpreted in relation to estrogen's
toxicity, since many of their effects on nerves are opposite. **Estrogen
blocks the production of energy while it stimulates nerve cells to use energy
more rapidly, and carbon dioxide promotes the production of energy, while
restraining the excitation which expends energy.** The presence of carbon
dioxide is an indicator of proper mitochondrial respiratory functioning.

Pharmaceutical blockers of glutamic acid transmission, and of calcium and
sodium uptake, prevent some deterioration following brain injury, but the most
physiological way to protect against those toxic processes is to maintain
metabolic energy at a high level. Magnesium, which is protective against
excitatory damage and is a calcium antagonist, tends to be retained in
proportion to the activity of thyroid hormone.

As I have discussed previously, progesterone alone has brought people out of
post-epileptic dementia and senile dementia, but it is reasonable to use a
combined physiological approach, including thyroid.

Besides providing new insights into biological energy and aging, the
recognition that estrogen activates the stress hormone system--the pituitary-
adrenal system--also provides clear insights into other problems, such as the
polycystic ovary syndrome, hirsutism, adrenal hyperplasia, Cushing's disease,
etc.  

REFERENCES

[The references are clustered into groups, showing estrogen's indirect
toxicity through its activation of the adrenal hormones, its direct brain-
toxicity, and some of the interactions between these and fats, nitric oxide,
etc.]

_._

Stress 1996 Jul;1(1):1-19 **Stress, Glucocorticoids, and Damage to the Nervous
System: The Current State of Confusion.** Sapolsky RM Department of Biological
Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. **An extensive literature
demonstrates that glucocorticoids (GCs), the adrenal steroids secreted during
stress, can have a broad range of deleterious effects in the brain. The
actions occur predominately, but not exclusively, in the hippocampus, a
structure rich in corticosteroid receptors and particularly sensitive to GCs.
The first half of this review considers three types of GC effects: a) GC-
induced atrophy, in which a few weeks' exposure to high GC concentrations or
to stress causes reversible atrophy of dendritic processes in the hippocampus;
b) GC neurotoxicity where, over the course of months, GC exposure kills
hippocampal neurons; c) GC neuroendangerment, in which elevated GC
concentrations at the time of a neurological insult such as a stroke or
seizure impairs the ability of neurons to survive the insult. The second half
considers the rather confusing literature as to the possible mechanisms
underlying** these deleterious GC actions. Five broad themes are discerned: a)
that GCs induce a metabolic vulnerability in neurons due to inhibition of
glucose uptake; b) that GCs exacerbate various steps in a **damaging cascade
of glutamate excess, calcium mobilization and oxygen radical generation. In a
review a number of years ago, I concluded that these two components accounted
for the deleterious GC effects. Specifically, the energetic vulnerability
induced by GCs left neurons metabolically compromised, and less able to carry
out the costly task of containing glutamate, calcium and oxygen radicals. More
recent work has shown this conclusion to be simplistic, and GC actions are
shown to probably involve at least three additional components: c) that GCs
impair a variety of neuronal defenses against neurologic insults; d) that GCs
disrupt the mobilization of neurotrophins; e) that GCs have a variety of
electrophysiological effects which can damage neurons.** The relevance of each
of those mechanisms to GC-induced atrophy, neurotoxicity and neuroendangerment
is considered, as are the likely interactions among them.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996 Oct;81(10):3639-43 **Short-term estradiol
treatment enhances pituitary-adrenal axis and sympathetic responses to
psychosocial stress in healthy young men.** Kirschbaum C, Schommer N,
Federenko I, Gaab J, Neumann O, Oellers M, Rohleder N, Untiedt A, Hanker J,
Pirke KM, Hellhammer DH Center for Psychobiological, University of Trier,
Germany. **Evidence from animal studies and clinical observations suggest that
the activity of the pituitary-adrenal axis is under significant influence of
sex steroids. The present study investigated how a short term elevation of
estradiol levels affects ACTH, cortisol, norepinephrine, and heart rate
responses to mental stress in healthy men.** In a double blind study, 16 men
received a patch delivering 0.1 mg estradiol/day transdermally, and age- and
body mass index-matched control subjects received a placebo patch. Twenty-four
to 48 h later, they were exposed to a brief psychosocial stressor (free speech
and mental arithmetic in front of an audience). In response to the
psychosocial stressor, ACTH, cortisol, norepinephrine, and heart rate were
increased in both experimental groups (all P < 0.0001). However, the
**estradiol-treated subjects showed exaggerated peak ACTH (P < 0.001) and
cortisol (P < 0.002) responses compared to the placebo group. Also, the
norepinephrine area under the response curve was greater in the estradiol
group ** (P < 0.05). Although heart rate responses differences failed to reach
statistical significance, they, too, tended to be larger in the estradiol
group. Neither mood ratings before or after the stressor, nor ratings of the
perception of the stressor could explain the observed endocrine response
differences. In conclusion, **short term estradiol administration resulted in
hyperresponses of the pituitary-adrenal axis and norepinephrine to
psychosocial stress in healthy young men independent of psychological
effects,** as assessed in this study.

J Appl Physiol 1996 Mar;80(3):931-9 **Treadmill exercise training and
estradiol increase plasma ACTH and prolactin after novel footshock.** White-
Welkley JE, Warren GL, Bunnell BN, Mougey EH, Meyerhoff JL, Dishman RK "We
examined whether rats that were treadmill exercise trained (Tr) or chronically
immobilized (CI) had similar responses by the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) cortical axis to acute stress and whether the HPA responses interacted
with the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis." **"[ACTH] and
[prolactin** ] after **footshock were higher in Tr rats with E2 compared with
CI and sedentary rats without E2;** recovery levels for sedentary animals were
higher after Run compared with Im. The elevation in [corticosterone] from
minute 1 to 15 of recovery was higher after the familiar Run and Im
conditions. Our findings are consistent with an increased responsiveness of
the HPA axis to novel footshock after treadmill exercise training that is
additionally modulated by the HPG axis."

Endocrinology 1992 Sep;131(3):1261-9. **Chronic estrogen-induced alterations
in adrenocorticotropin and corticosterone secretion, and glucocorticoid
receptor-mediated functions in female rats.** Burgess LH, Handa RJ "The effect
of estrogen (E) on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis was investigated in
female Sprague-Dawley rats." "...the ACTH and CORT secretory responses to
ether stress could be suppressed by exogenous RU 28362 (a specific
glucocorticoid receptor agonist; 40 micrograms/100 g BW for 4 days) in OVX
controls (P less than 0.05), **but not in E-treated animals.** These data
suggest that E can impair glucocorticoid receptor-mediated delayed or slow
negative feedback." "Thus, E **treatment results in a loss of the
glucocorticoid receptor's ability to autoregulate; this suggests that E may
cause a functional impairment of the glucocorticoid receptor even though
receptor binding appears normal. These findings suggest that hyperactivation
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis after stress in E-treated rats is
due in part to impaired glucocorticoid receptor-mediated slow negative
feedback."**

Am J Physiol 1994 Jul;267(1 Pt 1):E32-8 **Lesions of hypothalamic
paraventricular nuclei do not prevent the effect of estradiol on energy and
fat balance.** Dagnault A, Richard D. **"Plasma levels of corticosterone and
ACTH were higher in E2-treated rats than in animals receiving the placebo
treatment. The present results provide evidence that the hypothalamic PVH is
not an essential neuroanatomical structure in the effects of E2 on energy and
fat balances."**

Fertil Steril 1994 Oct;62(4):738-43 **Ovarian suppression reduces clinical and
endocrine expression of late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to
21-hydroxylase deficiency.** Carmina E, Lobo RA "OBJECTIVE: To determine the
effectiveness of GnRH-agonist (GnRH-a) treatment in women with late onset
congenital adrenal hyperplasia." "CONCLUSIONS: Suppression of the ovary with
GnRH-a treatment was beneficial in these patients with late-onset congenital
adrenal hyperplasia. An ovarian influence on the clinical and biochemical
findings of the disorder is suggested."

Life Sci 1995;57(9):833-7. **Effects of sex hormones on the steroidogenic
activity of dispersed adrenocortical cells of the rat adrenal cortex.** Nowak
KW, Neri G, Nussdorfer GG, Malendowicz LK "The effect of 17 beta-estradiol and
testosterone on glucocorticoid secretion were studied in vitro by using
dispersed inner adrenocortical cells obtained from gonadectomized female and
male rats. Independently of the sex of animals, estradiol enhanced basal, but
not ACTH-stimulated corticosterone (B) secretion; conversely, testosterone
inhibited ACTH-stimulated, but not basal B output." "Testosterone inhibited by
about 30% ACTH-stimulated PREG production and by about 54% total post-PREG
secretion (B was decreased to 56% of the control value, and other steroid
hormones were below the limit of sensitivity of our assay system). These
findings indicate that sex hormones directly affect rat adrenocortical
secretion, **mainly by acting on the rate-limiting step of steroidogenesis
(i.e. the conversion of cholesterol to PREG); moreover, they suggest that
testosterone is also able depress the activity of the enzymes operating
distally to cholesterol side-chain cleavage."**

J Endocrinol 1995 Feb;144(2):311-21 **The influence of ovarian steroids on
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal regulation in the female rat.** Carey MP,
Deterd CH, de Koning J, Helmerhorst F, de Kloet ER "The present study examined
the association between hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal (HPA) and
hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axes. HPA activity determined by plasma levels
of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) and corticosterone (B) was assessed in intact
female rats as a function of oestrous cycle stage under resting conditions and
after exposure to a 20 min restraint stress. To delineate the roles of
oestradiol and progesterone in HPA axis modulation, plasma concentrations of
ACTH and B were determined in ovariectomised (OVX) animals treated with
oestradiol and/or progesterone under resting conditions and during exposure to
the stress of a novel environment. The effects of these steroid treatments on
the transcription and/or binding properties of the two corticosteroid
receptors, the mineralocorticoid (MR) and glucocorticoid (GR) receptors, were
also examined in hippocampal tissue, (i) Fluctuations in basal and **stress-
induced plasma ACTH and B concentrations were found during the oestrous cycle
with highest levels at late pro-oestrus. (ii) In OVX steroid-replaced animals,
basal and stress-induced activity was enhanced in oestradiol and oestradiol
plus progesterone-treated animals compared with OVX controls."** "In
conclusion, we find that sex steroids modulate HPA activity and **suggest that
the observed effects of these steroids on hippocampal MR may underlie their
concerted mechanism of action in inducing an enhanced activity at the period
of late pro-oestrus."**

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995 Feb;80(2):603-7 **The impact of estrogen on
adrenal androgen sensitivity and secretion in polycystic ovary syndrome.**
Ditkoff EC, Fruzzetti F, Chang L, Stancyzk FZ, Lobo RA **"Adrenal
hyperandrogenism is a common feature of patients with polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCO).** This may be due to enhanced adrenal sensitivity to ACTH.
**Because enhanced ovarian androgen secretion does not appear to explain this
phenomenon, we explored the role of estrogen in inducing enhanced adrenal
sensitivity, in that a state of relative hyperestrogenism exists in PCO."**
"Steroid ratio **responses to oCRH suggested that 17,20-desmolase activity
(delta maximum change in the ratio of A4/17-hydroxyprogesterone) was lowered
with estrogen suppression and increased again after transdermal E2
administration."** "In conclusion, these data provide **evidence that estrogen
is at least one factor that influences adrenal androgen sensitivity in PCO and
may help explain the frequent finding of adrenal hyperandrogenism in this
syndrome."**

Endocrinology 1993 Nov;133(5):2284-91 **Estrogen and hydroxysteroid
sulfotransferases in guinea pig adrenal cortex: cellular and subcellular
distributions.** Whitnall MH, Driscoll WJ, Lee YC, Strott CA "The high
concentration of EST immunoreactivity in nuclei suggests that EST may play a
role in modulating the **ability of active estrogens to regulate gene
expression in ACTH-responsive cells. The distribution of HST labeling suggests
that sulfonation of adrenocortical 3-hydroxysteroids takes place largely
within smooth endoplasmic reticulum in the zona reticularis in adult guinea
pigs."**

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993 Sep;77(3):754-8. **Interaction of insulin-like
growth factor-II and estradiol directs steroidogenesis in the human fetal
adrenal toward dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate production.** Mesiano S, Jaffe
RB

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993 Aug;77(2):494-7. **Estradiol stimulates cortisol
production by adrenal cells in estrogen-dependent primary adrenocortical
nodular dysplasia.** Caticha O, Odell WD, Wilson DE, Dowdell LA, Noth RH,
Swislocki AL, Lamothe JJ, Barrow R. Adrenal glands from a patient with ACTH-
independent Cushing's syndrome, whose symptoms worsened during pregnancy and
oral contraceptive use, were cultured in different concentrations of
estradiol. Estradiol stimulated cortisol secretion in a dose-response manner
in the absence of ACTH." . "This is the first description of estradiol
stimulation of cortisol production by cultured adrenal cells in ACTH-
independent Cushing's syndrome."

Endocrinology 1992 Nov;131(5):2430-6 **Effects of gonadectomy and sex hormone
therapy on the endotoxin-stimulated hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis:
evidence for a neuroendocrine-immunological sexual dimorphism.** Spinedi E,
Suescun MO, Hadid R, Daneva T, Gaillard RC "Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
stimulates the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis by a mechanism involving the
release of cytokines, which activate the CRH-ACTH system and, as a result,
increase glucocorticoid secretion. **In the present study we investigated the
possibility that endogenous sex hormones modulate the in vivo endotoxin-
stimulated adrenal and immune responses in adult BALB/c mice."** "Our results
indicate that 1) **randomly cycling female mice have significantly more
pronounced corticosterone secretion than males 2 h after endotoxin**
injection, although the tumor necrosis factor responses were similar....".

J Neurosci Res 1995 Oct 1;42(2):228-35 **Activation of the hypothalamo-
anterior pituitary corticotropin- releasing hormone, adrenocorticotropin
hormone and beta-endorphin systems during the estradiol 17 beta-induced plasma
LH surge in the ovariectomized monkey.** Kerdelhue B, Jones GS, Gordon K,
Seltman H, Lenoir V, Melik Parsadaniantz S, Williams RF, Hodgen GD. "These
results suggest that there **may be a marked activation of the hypothalamo-
anterior pituitary-adrenal axis during the negative and positive feedback
phases of the E2B-induced LH surge in the ovariectomized monkey."**

Biol Reprod 1995 Nov;53(5):996-1002 **Activation of the baboon fetal
pituitary-adrenocortical axis at midgestation by estrogen: responsivity of the
fetal adrenal gland to adrenocorticotropic hormone in vitro.** Berghorn KA,
Albrecht ED, Pepe G.J.

Fertil Steril 1996 May;65(5):950-3 **Ovarian hyperstimulation augments adrenal
dehydro- epiandrosterone sulfate secretion.** Casson PR, Kristiansen SB,
Umstot E, Carson SA, Buster JE.

Hinyokika Kiyo 1997 Apr;43(4):275-8 **[A case of concurrent bilateral
adrenocortical adenoma causing Cushing's syndrome].** Koga F, Sumi S, Umeda H,
Maeda S, Honda M, Hosoya Y, Yano M, Konita A, Suzuki S, Yoshida K. "All 14
previously reported cases of bilateral adrenocortical adenoma (BAA) causing
Cushing's syndrome as well as the present case were **concurrent and dominant
in females of reproductive age. This suggests that some cofactors other than
ACTH, such as estrogen, contribute to the pathogenesis of BAA."**

Endocrinology 1991 Nov;129(5):2503-11 **Variations in the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal response to stress during the estrous cycle in the rat.**
Viau V, Meaney MJ. **"In cycling rats, we found significantly higher peak ACTH
(P less than 0.01) and B (P less than 0.05) responses to stress during
proestrus** compared to the estrous and diestrous phases." "In response to
**stress, ACTH levels were higher (P less than 0.01) in the E' group compared
to the EP' and O' groups.** Although the peak B response was similar in all
groups, the E' and EP' groups secreted more B after the termination of stress
than did the O' group. Within the 20 min stress period, **ACTH levels in the
E' group were significantly (P less than 0.05) higher at 5, 10, and 15 min
after the onset of stress, compared to the EP' and O' groups. Plasma B levels
were significantly higher in the E' group at 5 and 10 min (P less than 0.05
and P less than 0.01, respectively) compared to the EP' and O' group. beta-
endorphin-like immunoreactive responses to restraint stress were also
significantly higher in the E' group compared to the EP' (P less than 0.05)
and O'** (P less than 0.01) groups. In contrast to the effect seen at 24 h,
ACTH responses to stress 48 h after E2 injection in the E' group were
comparable to O' animals. There was no effect of E2 on ACTH clearance, whereas
B clearance was enhanced in E' treated animals vs. O'-treated animals. These
results indicate that the HPA axis in the female rat is most sensitive to
stress during proestrous. Such enhanced HPA responses to stress are limited to
the early portion of proestrous, **as progesterone appears to inhibit the
facilitatory effects of estrogen on ACTH release during stress.** Taken
together, these results suggest an ovarian influence on both activational and
inhibitory components of HPA activity."

Semin Reprod Endocrinol 1997 May;15(2):137-57 **Adrenal involvement in
polycystic ovary syndrome.** Gonzalez F. "Whereas 17,20 lyase hyperactivity
diagnosed by defined criteria in response to pharmacological ACTH may be an
intrinsic genetic defect, **increases in 17,20 lyase activity and adrenal
androgen hyper-responsiveness to ACTH in response to physiological ACTH may be
promoted by the functional elevation of estrogen of ovarian origin in PCOS.**
The latest in vitro data suggest the estrogen may elicit its effect on the
adrenal cortex through a receptor mediated mechanism."

Metabolism 1997 Aug;46(8):902-7. **Mild adrenal and ovarian steroidogenic
abnormalities in hirsute women without hyperandrogenemia: does idiopathic
hirsutism exist?** Escobar-Morreale HF, Serrano-Gotarredona J, Garcia-Robles
R, Sancho J, Varela C **"Basal and ACTH-stimulated 17OHP and delta 4-A, and
stimulated DHEA concentrations were reduced with ovarian suppression,** but
their net increment and ratio to the increase of F in response to ACTH
remained unchanged, **reflecting the ovarian contribution to the secretion of
these steroids."**.

Am J Physiol 1997 Apr;272(4 Pt 2):R1128-34. **Modulation of ovine fetal
adrenocorticotropin secretion by androstenedione and 17beta-estradiol.** Saoud
CJ, Wood CE "Parturition in sheep is initiated by increases in activity of the
fetal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. We **have previously reported that
cortisol negative feedback efficacy is decreased at the end of gestation.**
The present study was designed to test the hypothesis that **increasing plasma
estrogen and/or androgen concentrations in the fetus might increase plasma
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) concentration, either by stimulating ACTH
secretion or by altering the negative feedback** effect of cortisol on ACTH."
"We conclude that increased fetal cortisol and ACTH secretion at the end of
gestation may be due to the combined effects of the gonadal steroids in that
**estradiol increases basal plasma ACTH secretion while androstenedione
reduces cortisol negative feedback efficacy."**

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998 Sep;83(9):3083-8. **Menstrual abnormalities in
women with Cushing's disease are correlated with hypercortisolemia rather than
raised circulating androgen levels.** Lado-Abeal J, Rodriguez-Arnao J, Newell-
Price JD, Perry LA, Grossman AB, Besser GM, Trainer PJ.

Eur J Endocrinol 1998 Apr;138(4):430-5. **Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis
and adrenal function before and after ovariectomy in premenopausal women.** De
Leo V, la Marca A, Talluri B, D'Antona D, Morgante G **The hypothalamo-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is modulated by sex hormones. Few data exist on
the relation between acute estrogen deficit and HPA axis response to
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).** The effects of a sudden drop in
estradiol levels on basal and CRH-stimulated levels of ACTH, cortisol,
testosterone, androstenedione and 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) were
assessed in nine premenopausal women (44-48 years of age), before and after
ovariectomy. The CRH test was performed before and 8 days after ovariectomy.
**A significant reduction in ACTH and adrenal steroids but not in cortisol
response to CRH was observed after ovariectomy.** The ratio of deltamax
androstenedione/17-OHP after CRH stimulation was substantially the same before
and after ovariectomy, whereas **deltamax 17-OHP/cortisol was significantly
lower in ovariectomized** women showing increased 21- and 11beta-hydroxylase
activity. The results show that the acute estrogen deficit induces changes in
the HPA xis characterized by **reduced stimulated secretion of ACTH and
steroids** but normal stimulated cortisol production.

Biokhimiia 1987 Sep;52(9):1501-11 **[Activation of lipolysis and ketogenesis
in tumor-bearing animals as a reflection of chronic stress states].** [Article
in Russian] Chekulaev VA, Shelepov VP, Pasha-zade GR, Shapot VS In order to
elucidate the peculiarities of brain metabolism in tumour-bearing organisms,
the arterio-venous (A-V) content of glucose, acetoacetate (Ac-Ac), beta-
hydroxybutyrate (beta-HB) and non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA) in growing
Zajdela ascite hepatoma (ZAH) and solid hepatoma 27 (H-27) was compared.
Analysis of metabolic patterns of healthy, starving and fed recipients (ZAH
and H-27) revealed the inadequacy of the concepts on anorexia as being the
cause of carbohydrate-lipid metabolic disturbances. In tumour-bearing
organisms **lipolysis and ketogenesis reflect the tumour-induced chronic
stress.** Absorption of beta-HB and release of Ac-Ac by brain were observed at
all stages of malignant growth. **This is probably due to a partial switch-
over of brain metabolism to non-carbohydrate energy sources.** Besides,
certain stages of tumour growth are associated with **active assimilation of
NEFA by brain.** A correlation between the A-V difference with respect to
glucose and Ac-Ac as well as between the glucose and NEFA contents was
established. It was assumed that the A-V difference in glucose is the main
regulator of ketone body metabolism.

R. Sanchez Olea, et al., **"Inhibition by polyunsaturated fatty acids of cell
volume regulation and osmolyte fluxes in astrocytes,"** Amer. J. of Physiology
--cell physiology 38(1), C96-C102, 1995. **"...potent blockers of regulatory
volume decrease and of the swelling-activated efflux of taurine,
D-aspartate,** inositol, and I-125 (used as marker of Cl). **...oleic and
ricinoleic acids and saturated fatty acids were ineffective."
"...polyunsaturated fatty acids directly inhibit the permeability pathways
correcting cell volume after swelling in cultured astrocytes."**

P. H. Chan and R. A. Fishman, " **Brain edema: Induction in cortical slices by
polyunsaturated fatty acids** ," Science 201, 358-369, 1978. "This cellular
edema was specific, since **neither saturated fatty acids nor a fatty acid
containing a single double bond had such effect**."

Endocrinology 1992 Aug;131(2):662-8 **Estradiol selectively regulates agonist
binding sites on the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor complex in the CA1 region
of the hippocampus.** Weiland NG. Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology,
Rockefeller University. **"Estradiol alters cognitive function and lowers the
threshold for seizures in women and laboratory animals. Both of these
activities are modulated by the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate in the
hippocampus. To assess the hypothesis that estradiol increases the sensitivity
of the hippocampus to glutamate activation by increasing glutamate binding
sites, the densities of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) agonist sites...."** "Two
days of estradiol treatment increased the density of NMDA agonist, but not of
competitive nor noncompetitive NMDA antagonist binding sites exclusively in
the CA1 region of the hippocampus." **"The increase in NMDA agonist sites with
ovarian hormone treatment should result in an increase in the sensitivity of
the hippocampus to glutamate activation which may mediate some of the effects
of estradiol on learning and epileptic seizure activity."**

J Neurochem 1994 Sep;63(3):953-62 **Corticosterone regulates heme oxygenase-2
and NO synthase transcription and protein expression in rat brain.** Weber CM,
Eke BC, Maines MD. **"We suggest that glucocorticoid-mediated deficits in
hippocampal functions may reflect their negative effect on messenger-
generating systems."**

Gen Pharmacol 1993 Nov;24(6):1383-6 **Changes in microtubular tau protein
after estrogen in a cultured human neuroblastoma cell line.** Lew GM. **"4.
The estrogen (10(-7) M) also caused a 31% reduction in the total number of
cells."**

Rodriguez, P; Fernandez-Galaz, C; Tejero, A. **Controlled neonatal exposure to
estrogens: A suitable tool for reproductive aging studies in the female rat.**
Biology of Reproduction, v.49, n.2, (1993): 387-392.

O'Rourke, M T; Lipson, S F; Ellison, P T. **Ovarian function in the latter
half of the reproductive lifespan.** American Journal of Human Biology, v.8,
n.6, (1996): 751-759.

Schumacher, M; Robel, P; Baulieu, E-E. **Development and regeneration of the
nervous system: A role for neurosteroids.** Developmental Neuroscience, v.18,
n.1-2, (1996): 6-21.

Life Sci 1996;58(17):1461-7 **The endogenous estrogen metabolite
2-methoxyestradiol induces apoptotic neuronal cell death in vitro.** Nakagawa-
Yagi Y, Ogane N, Inoki Y, Kitoh N. "We examined the effects of
2-methoxyestradiol, a metabolite of estradiol, on cell death in retinoic acid
(RA)-differentiated neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell cultures. **Cell death was
induced by 2-methoxyestradiol in a concentration- dependent manner**." **[**
Provides evidence] **"...for an endogenous neuroactive steroid metabolite in
the etiology of some neurodegenerative diseases."**

Recent Prog Horm Res 1997;52:279-303 **Aging of the female reproductive
system: a window into brain aging.** Wise PM, Kashon ML, Krajnak KM, Rosewell
KL, Cai A, Scarbrough K, Harney JP, McShane T, Lloyd JM, Weiland NG **"The
menopause marks the permanent end of fertility in women. It was once thought
that the exhaustion of ovarian follicles was the single, most important
explanation for the transition to the menopause. Over the past decade, this
perception has gradually changed with the realization that there are multiple
pacemakers of reproductive senescence. We will present evidence that lends
credence to the hypothesis that the central nervous system is a critical
pacemaker of reproductive aging and that changes at this level** contribute to
the timing of the menopause."

Neuroendocrinology 1989 Nov;50(5):605-612 **N-methyl-aspartic acid lesions of
the arcuate nucleus in adult C57BL/6J mice: a new model for age-related
lengthening of the estrous cycle.** May PC, Kohama SG, Finch CE. "We report a
new effect of the excitotoxin N-methyl-aspartic acid (NMA) on adult mice.
Besides confirming cell loss in the arcuate nucleus of animals treated as
adults, we also observed lengthened estrous cycles. Cycling female C57BL/6J
mice were treated with subcutaneous injections of NMA and estrous cycles
monitored for 30 days. NMA treatment lengthened average estrous cycle length
by 1 day, to 5.6 days." **"Consistent with the regional pattern of cell loss,
little specific binding of any glutamatergic ligand was observed in the VMN.
NMA caused weight gain in all age groups." "The transition from 4-day to 5-
and 6-day estrous cycles produced by NMA treatment mimics the early age-
related changes in estrous cycle patterns in rodents."** This new model will
be useful in analyzing the contributions of neuroendocrine changes in the
arcuate nucleus to reproductive senescence."

**Pathologic effect of estradiol on the hypothalamus.** Brawer JR; Beaudet A;
Desjardins GC; Schipper HM. Biol Reprod, 1993 Oct, 49:4, 647-52. "In addition
to its multiple physiological actions, we have shown that estradiol is also
selectively cytotoxic to beta-endorphin neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate
nucleus. The mechanism underlying this neurotoxic action appears to involve
the conversion of estradiol to catechol estrogen and subsequent oxidation to
o-semiquinone free radicals. The estradiol-induced loss of beta-endorphin
neurons engenders a compensatory increment in mu opioid binding in the medial
preoptic area rendering this region supersensitive to residual beta-endorphin
or to other endogenous opioids. The consequent persistent opioid inhibition
results in a cascade of neuroendocrine deficits that are ultimately expressed
as a chronically attenuated plasma LH pattern to which the ovaries respond by
becoming anovulatory and polycystic. This neurotoxic action of estradiol may
contribute to a number of reproductive disorders in humans and in animals in
which aberrant hypothalamic function is a major component."

**Vitamin E protects hypothalamic beta-endorphin neurons from estradiol
neurotoxicity**. Desjardins GC; Beaudet A; Schipper HM; Brawer JR.
Endocrinology, 1992 Nov, 131:5, 2482-4 **"Estradiol valerate (EV) treatment
has been shown to result in the destruction of 60% of beta-endorphin neurons
in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus."**

**Estrogen-induced hypothalamic beta-endorphin neuron loss: a possible model
of hypothalamic aging.** Desjardins GC; Beaudet A; Meaney MJ; Brawer JR. Exp
Gerontol, 1995 May-Aug, 30:3-4, 253-67 Over the course of normal aging, all
female mammals with regular cycles display an irreversible arrest of cyclicity
at mid-life. Males, in contrast, exhibit gametogenesis until death. **Although
it is widely accepted that exposure to estradiol throughout life contributes
to reproductive aging, a unified hypothesis of the role of estradiol in
reproductive senescence has yet to emerge.** Recent evidence derived from a
rodent model of chronic estradiol-mediated accelerated reproductive senescence
now suggests such a hypothesis. It has been shown that chronic estradiol
exposure results in the **destruction of greater than 60% of all beta-
endorphin neurons in the arcuate nucleus** while leaving other neuronal
populations spared. This loss of opioid neurons is prevented by treatment with
antioxidants indicating that it results from **estradiol-induced formation of
free radicals. Furthermore, we have shown that this beta-endorphin cell loss
is followed by a compensatory upregulation of mu opioid receptors in the
vicinity of LHRH cell bodies.** The increment in mu opioid receptors
presumably renders the opioid target cells supersensitive to either residual
beta-endorphin or other endogenous mu ligands, such as met-enkephalin, thus
resulting in chronic opioid **suppression of the pattern of LHRH release, and
subsequently that of LH.** Indeed, prevention of the neuroendocrine effects of
estradiol by antioxidant treatment also **prevents the cascade of
neuroendocrine aberrations resulting in anovulatory acyclicity.** The loss of
beta-endorphin neurons along with the paradoxical opioid supersensitivity
which ensues, provides a unifying framework in which to interpret the diverse
features that characterize the reproductively senescent female.

**The 21-aminosteroid antioxidant, U74389F, prevents estradiol-induced
depletion of hypothalamic beta-endorphin in adult female rats.** Schipper HM;
Desjardins GC; Beaudet A; Brawer JR. Brain Res, 1994 Jul 25, 652:1, 161-3 **"A
single intramuscular injection of 2 mg estradiol valerate (EV) results in
neuronal degeneration and beta-endorphin depletion in the hypothalamic arcuate
nucleus of adult female rats."**

J Neurochem 1998 Sep;71(3):1187-93 **Energy dependency of glucocorticoid
exacerbation of gp120 neurotoxicity.** Brooke SM, Howard SA, Sapolsky RM "The
HIV envelope glycoprotein, gp120, a well documented neurotoxin, may be
involved in AIDS-related dementia complex. gp120 works through an NMDA
receptor- and calcium-dependent mechanism to damage neurons. We have
previously demonstrated that both natural and synthetic glucocorticoids (GCs)
exacerbate gp120-induced neurotoxicity and calcium mobilization in hippocampal
mixed cultures. GCs, steroid hormones secreted during stress, are now shown to
work in conjunction with gp120 to decrease ATP levels and to work
synergistically with gp120 to decrease the mitochondrial potential in
hippocampal cultures. **Furthermore, energy supplementation blocked the
ability of GCs to worsen gp120's effects on neuronal survival and calcium
mobilization.** A GC-induced reduction in glucose transport in hippocampal
neurons, as previously documented, may contribute to this energetic
dependency. These results may have clinical significance, considering the
common treatment of severe cases of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, typical of
HIV infection, with large doses of synthetic GCs."

Acta Otolaryngol Suppl (Stockh) 1990;476:32-6. **Glutamate neurotoxicity in
the cochlea: a possible consequence of ischaemic or anoxic conditions
occurring in ageing.** Pujol R, Rebillard G, Puel JL, Lenoir M, Eybalin M,
Recasens M.

Br J Pharmacol 1996 Jan;117(1):189-95. **Metabotropic glutamate receptors,
transmitter output and fatty acids: studies in rat brain slices.** Lombardi G,
Leonardi P, Moroni F. "The requirement of both unsaturated fatty acids and
1S,3R-ACPD in the facilitation of transmitter exocytosis may play an important
role in the regulation of synaptic plasticity."

Adv Exp Med Biol 1992;318:147-58 **A role for the arachidonic acid cascade in
fast synaptic modulation: ion channels and transmitter uptake systems as
target proteins.** Volterra A, Trotti D, Cassutti P, Tromba C, Galimberti R,
Lecchi P, Racagni G. "Recent evidence indicates that arachidonic acid (AA) and
its metabolites play a fast messenger role in synaptic modulation in the CNS."
"Other types of K+ channels in vertebrate excitable cells have been found to
be **sensitive to arachidonic acid, lipoxygenase products, and polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFA). In the mammalian CNS, arachidonic acid is released upon
stimulation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors."
"Polyunsaturated fatty acids mimic arachidonate with a rank of potency
parallel to the degree of unsaturation. Since the effect of glutamate on the
synapses is terminated by diffusion and uptake, a slowing of the termination
process may potentiate glutamate synaptic efficacy. However, excessive
extracellular accumulation of glutamate may lead to neurotoxicity."**

J Neurochem 1999 Jan;72(1):129-38 **. Transient inhibition of glutamate uptake
in vivo induces neurodegeneration when energy metabolism is impaired.**
Sanchez-Carbente MR, Massieu L **.** "Impairment of glutamate transport during
ischemia might be related to the elevation of the extracellular concentration
of glutamate and ischemic neuronal damage. Additionally, impairment of energy
metabolism in vivo leads to neurodegeneration apparently mediated by a
secondary excitotoxic mechanism. In vitro observations show that glucose
deprivation and inhibition of energy metabolism exacerbate the toxic effects
of glutamate." **"Our results show that glutamate uptake inhibition leads to
marked neuronal damage in energy-deficient rats but not in intact
animals...."**

J Neurochem 1998 Nov;71(5):1993-2005. **Glia modulate NMDA-mediated signaling
in primary cultures of cerebellar granule cells.** Beaman-Hall CM, Leahy JC,
Benmansour S, Vallano ML "Nordihydroguaiaretic acid, a lipoxygenase inhibitor,
blocked NMDA-mediated toxicity in astrocyte-poor cultures, raising the
possibility **that glia effectively reduce the accumulation of highly
diffusible and toxic arachidonic acid metabolites in** neurons. Alternatively,
glia may alter neuronal development/phenotype in a manner that selectively
reduces susceptibility to NR-mediated toxicity."

J Neurosci 1997 Dec 1;17(23):9060-7 **. Pyruvate protects neurons against
hydrogen peroxide-induced toxicity.** Desagher S, Glowinski J, Premont J **.
"Pyruvate strongly protected neurons against both H2O2 added to the external
medium and H2O2 endogenously produced through the redox cycling of the
experimental quinone menadione. The neuroprotective effect of pyruvate
appeared to result rather from the ability of alpha-ketoacids to undergo
nonenzymatic decarboxylation in the presence of H2O2 than from an improvement
of energy metabolism. Indeed, several other alpha-ketoacids, including alpha-
ketobutyrate, which is not an energy substrate, reproduced the neuroprotective
effect of pyruvate. In contrast, lactate, a neuronal energy substrate, did not
protect neurons from H2O2."** "Together, these results indicate that pyruvate
efficiently protects neurons against both exogenous and endogenous H2O2. Its
low toxicity and its capacity to cross the blood-brain barrier open a new
therapeutic perspective in brain pathologies in which H2O2 is involved." ****

J Neurosci 1998 Jan 1;18(1):156-63 **. Neuroprotective effects of creatine and
cyclocreatine in animal models of Huntington's disease.** Matthews RT, Yang L,
Jenkins BG, Ferrante RJ, Rosen BR, Kaddurah-Daouk R, Beal MF **.**

M. C. Diamond, **_Enriching Heredity: The Importance of the Environment on the
Anatomy of the Brain._** Free Press, N.Y., 1988.

C. Finch and L. Hayflick, **_Handbook of the Biology of Aging._** Van Nostrand
Reinhold, N.Y., 1977.

Swanson RA **Physiologic coupling of glial glycogen metabolism to neuronal
activity in brain.** Can J Physiol Pharmacol, 1992, 70 Suppl:, S138-44. Brain
glycogen is localized almost exclusively to glia, where it undergoes
continuous utilization and resynthesis. We have shown that glycogen
utilization increases during tactile stimulation of the rat face and
vibrissae. **Conversely, decreased neuronal activity during hibernation and
anesthesia is accompanied by a marked increase in brain glycogen content**.
These observations support a link between neuronal activity and glial glycogen
metabolism. The energetics of glycogen metabolism suggest that glial glycogen
is mobilized to meet increased metabolic demands of glia rather than to serve
as a substrate for neuronal activity. An advantage to the use of glycogen may
be the potentially faster generation of ATP from glycogen than from glucose.
Alternatively, glycogen could be utilized if glucose supply is transiently
insufficient during the onset of increased metabolic activity. Brain glycogen
may have a **dynamic role as a buffer between the abrupt increases in focal
metabolic demands that occur during normal brain activity and the compensatory
changes in focal cerebral blood flow or oxidative metabolism.**

**"Free fatty acids activate the hypothalamic-pituitary- adrenocortical axis
in rats." ** Widmaier EP; Rosen K; Abbott B. _Endocrinology,_ **** 1992 Nov,
131:5, 2313-8. "Intravenous administration of Intralipid 10% increases blood
levels of essential free fatty acids." "Since corticosterone, the final
secretory product of the rat hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis,
is also lipolytic, we tested the hypothesis that FFA would inhibit the HPA
axis." "At 60 min, plasma ACTH levels were significantly elevated to over 1500
pg/ml in Intralipid-infused rats, but were unchanged in saline controls.
**This dose of Intralipid increased corticosterone levels by nearly 20-fold at
120 min. At 180 min, corticosterone levels were still significantly greater**
than those in saline controls. Lower doses of Intralipid also significantly
elevated both FFA and corticosterone levels, but by 180 min, levels of both
were similar to those in controls." "The results suggest that high circulating
FFA levels activate, rather than inhibit, the HPA axis in rats. Since stress
activates glucocorticoid production and **increases FFA levels due to
lipolysis, it is possible that FFA and the HPA axis constitute a previously
unrecognized positive feedback loop."**

**"Impairment of glucose disposal by infusion of triglycerides in humans: role
of glycemia,"** Felley CP; Felley EM; van Melle GD; Frascarolo P; Jéquier E;
Felber JP, Am J Physiol, 1989 Jun, 256:6 Pt 1, E747-52. **"These results
suggest the existence of physiological regulatory mechanisms by which 1) the
rise in plasma free fatty acid inhibits both oxidative and nonoxidative
glucose disposal, and 2) the rise in glycemia stimulates predominantly
nonoxidative glucose disposal."**

Nature 1998 Jan 15;391(6664):281-5 **. Prostaglandins stimulate calcium-
dependent glutamate release in astrocytes.** Bezzi P, Carmignoto G, Pasti L,
Vesce S, Rossi D, Rizzini BL, Pozzan T, Volterra A **.** Astrocytes in the
brain form an intimately associated network with neurons. They respond to
neuronal activity and synaptically released glutamate by raising intracellular
calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i), which could represent the start of back-
signalling to neurons. **Here we show that coactivation of the AMPA/kainate
and metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) on astrocytes stimulates these
cells to release glutamate through a Ca2+-dependent process mediated by
prostaglandins. Pharmacological inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis prevents
glutamate release, whereas application of prostaglandins (in particular PGE2)
mimics and occludes the releasing action of GluR agonists. PGE2 promotes
Ca2+-dependent glutamate release from cultured astrocytes and also from acute
brain slices under conditions that suppress neuronal exocytotic release.**
When applied to the CA1 hippocampal region, PGE2 induces increases in [Ca2+]i
both in astrocytes and in neurons. The [Ca2+]i increase in neurons is mediated
by glutamate released from astrocytes, because it is abolished by GluR
antagonists. **Our results reveal a new pathway of regulated transmitter
release from astrocytes and outline the existence of an integrated
glutamatergic cross-talk between neurons and astrocytes in situ that may play
critical roles in synaptic plasticity and in neurotoxicity.**

Prog Neurobiol 1998 Jan;54(1):99-125 **. Microglia as effector cells in brain
damage and repair: focus on prostanoids and nitric oxide.** Minghetti L, Levi
G. **** "The present article deals with two classes of compounds that
activated microglial cells can produce in large amounts: prostanoids (that
derive from arachidonic acid through the cyclooxygenase pathway), and nitric
oxide (that is synthesized from arginine by nitric oxide synthase).
Prostanoids and nitric oxide have a number of common targets, on which they
may exert similar or opposite actions, and have a crucial role in the
regulation of inflammation, immune responses and cell viability. Their
synthesis can massively increase when the inducible isoforms of cyclooxygenase
and nitric oxide synthase are expressed."

In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 1998 Mar;34(3):265-74 **. Prostaglandins act as
neurotoxin for differentiated neuroblastoma cells in culture and increase
levels of ubiquitin and beta-amyloid.** Prasad KN, La Rosa FG, Prasad JE **.**
"Although chronic inflammatory reactions have been proposed to cause neuronal
degeneration associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD), the role of
prostaglandins (PGs), one of the secretory products of inflammatory reactions,
in degeneration of nerve cells has not been studied. Our initial observation
that **PGE1-induced differentiated neuroblastoma (NB) cells degenerate in
vitro more rapidly than those inducedby RO20-1724, an inhibitor of cyclic
nucleotide phosphodiesterase, has led us to postulate that PGs act as a
neurotoxin.** This study has further investigated the effects of PGs on
differentiated NB cells in culture. Results showed that PGA1 was more
effective than PGE1 in causing degeneration of differentiated NB cells as
shown by the cytoplasmic vacuolation and fragmentation of soma, nuclei, and
neurites. Because increased levels of ubiquitin and beta-amyloid have been
implicated in causing neuronal degeneration, we studied the effects of PGs on
the levels of these proteins during degeneration of NB cells in vitro...."
"Results showed that PGs increased the intracellular levels of ubiquitin and
beta-amyloid prior to degeneration, whereas the degenerated NB cells had
negligible levels of these proteins. **These data suggest that PGs act as
external neurotoxic signals** which increase levels of ubiquitin and beta-
amyloid that represent one of the intracellular signals for initiating
degeneration of nerve cells."

Brain Res Bull 1998 Apr;45(6):637-40. **The fatty acid composition of maternal
diet affects the response to excitotoxic neural injury in neonatal rat pups.**
Valencia P, Carver JD, Wyble LE, Benford VJ, Gilbert-Barness E, Wiener DA,
Phelps C **Fatty acids and their derivatives play a role in the response to
neural injury.** The effects of prenatal and postnatal dietary fatty acid
composition on excitotoxic neural injury were investigated in neonatal rat
pups."

Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1998 Nov;219(2):120-5 **. Prostaglandins as putative
neurotoxins in Alzheimer's disease.** Prasad KN, Hovland AR, La Rosa FG,
Hovland PG **.** "Chronic inflammatory reactions in the brain appear to be one
of the primary etiological factors in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease
(AD). This is supported by the fact that the secretory products of
inflammatory reactions, which include cytokines, complement proteins, adhesion
molecules, and free radicals, are neurotoxic. We have recently reported that
prostaglandins (PGs), which are also released during inflammatory reactions,
cause rapid degenerative changes in differentiated murine neuroblastoma cells
(NB) in culture." "The mechanisms underlying Abeta-induced neuronal
degeneration have been under intense investigation, and several mechanisms of
action have been proposed. We postulate that PG-induced elevation of Abeta may
lead to an increased binding of Abeta to the 20S proteasome, resulting in a
reduction of 20S proteasome-mediated degradation of ubiquitin-conjugated
proteins. This is predicted to lead to an increase in an accumulation of
abnormal proteins, which ultimately contribute to neuronal degeneration and
death. Based on our hypothesis and on studies published by others, we propose
that a combination of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which inhibit the
synthesis of PGs, and antioxidant vitamins, which quench free radicals and
both of which have been recently reported to be of some value in AD treatment
when used-individually, may be much more effective in the prevention and
treatment of AD than the individual agents alone."

Mol Chem Neuropathol 1998 May;34(1):79-101 **. Effects of EGb 761 on fatty
acid reincorporation during reperfusion following ischemia in the brain of the
awake gerbil.** Rabin O, Drieu K, Grange E, Chang MC, Rapoport SI, Purdon AD
**.**

**Regulation of arcuate nucleus synaptology by estrogen.** Leedom L; Lewis C;
Garcia-Segura LM; Naftolin F. Ann N Y Acad Sci, 1994 Nov 14, 743:, 61-71
"Estrogen modulates the synaptology of the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus during
sexual differentiation of the rat brain in both males and females. In **males,
testosterone of gonadal origin is converted to estrogen in the brain** by an
enzyme, aromatase, which is also present in females. The exposure of the
male's hypothalamus to relatively high levels of estrogen (following a
perinatal testosterone surge) leads to the development of a pattern of
synaptogenesis **which does not support an estrogen-induced gonadotrophin
surge in the adult.** In female rats, hypothalamic development **occurs with
permissively low levels** of estrogen, enabling a midcycle estrogen-induced
gonadotrophin surge and ovulation in adulthood. During adult reproductive life
in female rats, circulating estrogen modulates the synaptology of the arcuate
nucleus. **The most physiological example of this is the 30-50% loss of
axosomatic synapses following the preovulatory estrogen surge on diestrus-
proestrus.** Studies on post-synaptic membranes of the arcuate nucleus reveal
sex differences in membrane organization and protein content which are
estrogen-dependent. **Estrogen apparently stimulates endocytosis of areas of
post-synaptic membrane that are dense with small intramembranous protein
particles, resulting in a reduction in the number of small intramembranous
particles. This also appears to be the physiologic mechanism of neuronal
changes in females during the estrus cycle.** Repeated exposure to
preovulatory levels of estrogen may lead to an age-related decline in
reproductive capacity in female rats. Aging females lose the estrogen-induced
gonadotrophin surge responsible for ovulation. **This loss of function may
result from a cumulative estrogen effect during the repeated ovarian cycles
which results in a reorganization of the synaptology** on which regulates the
estrogen-induced gonadotrophin surge." ". . .recent research has shown that
GABA, the monoamines, and several neuropeptides are participants in the
estrogen-sensitive network which regulates GNRH secretion. In this regard,
present work shows estrogen-induced changes in GABA and dopamine synapses in
the arcuate nucleus."

**17 beta Estradiol-induced increase in brain dopamine D-2 receptor:
antagonism by MIF-1.** **Rajakumar G** ; Chiu P; Chiu S; Johnson RL; **Mishra
RK** Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Peptides, 1987 Nov-Dec, 8:6, 997-1002
Animal behavioral and neurochemical studies implicate dopaminergic systems
**in the neurological sequelae induced by estrogen.** In the present study, we
demonstrated for the first time that MIF-1, a neuropeptide unrelated to
classical dopamine agonists, when given prior to, concurrently with, and after
17 beta-estradiol, antagonized significantly the estrogen-induced increase in
the **density of dopamine D-2 receptor** both in the striatum and the
mesolimbic area of male rat brain. The current findings have implications for
the prophylactic and therapeutic potential for MIF-1 in **extrapyramidal motor
disorders caused by estrogen imbalance in humans.**

Eur J Clin Invest 1984 Dec;14(6):431-4 **Effect of ovulation on haem
metabolism in rabbits.** Lindahl J, Werner B, Lerner R **. "To investigate the
origin of the cyclic changes in the rate of endogenous carbon-monoxide
production (nCO) during the menstrual cycle, haem turnover was determined
before and after chorion gonadotropic hormone-induced ovulation in six female
rabbits. 14C-labelled delta-aminolevulinic acid and glycine were administered
and the excretion rate of 14CO (A14CO) was measured for determination of
hepatic and** bone-marrow haem turnover, respectively." **". . . nCO was
increased 34% (P less than 0.05) during the post-ovulation period. As the
increase in 'unassigned' haem turnover was small and may be unaccompanied by a
contemporary increase in bilirubin/CO production, it was concluded that the
increase in nCO during the post-ovulation period essentially depends on
increased destruction of circulating red cells in the rabbit."**

J Neurotrauma 1993 Winter;10(4):373-84. **Beneficial effect of the
nonselective opiate antagonist naloxone hydrochloride and the thyrotropin-
releasing hormone (TRH) analog YM-14673 on long-term neurobehavioral outcome
following experimental brain injury in the rat.** McIntosh TK, Fernyak S,
Hayes RL, Faden AI

J Neurosci 1990 Nov;10(11):3524-30. **Opiate antagonist nalmefene improves
intracellular free Mg2+, bioenergetic state, and neurologic outcome following
traumatic brain injury in rats.** Vink R, McIntosh TK, Rhomhanyi R, Faden AI.
"Treatment of CNS trauma with the opiate antagonist naloxone improves outcome,
though the mechanisms of action remain speculative."

Brain Res 1989 Mar 20;482(2):252-60. **Magnesium protects against neurological
deficit after brain injury.** McIntosh TK, Vink R, Yamakami I, Faden AI.

Adv Neurol 1988;47:531-46. **Role of thyrotropin-releasing hormone and opiate
receptor antagonists in limiting central nervous system injury.** Faden AI.
"Opiate antagonists, including receptor antagonists and physiologic
antagonists, have been shown to produce beneficial effects in a variety of
models of CNS injury and in a variety of species. Opiate antagonists improve
spinal cord blood flow, electrical conduction of the spinal cord, pathological
changes, and motor recovery following traumatic spinal cord injury in cats.
TRH appears to be superior to naloxone in this regard, although direct
comparisons between receptor-selective opiate receptor antagonists and TRH
have not been made."

Exp Neurol 1994 Sep;129(1):64-9. **Progesterone facilitates cognitive recovery
and reduces secondary neuronal loss caused by cortical contusion injury in
male rats.** Roof RL, Duvdevani R, Braswell L, Stein DG.

Exp Neurol 1996 Apr;138(2):246-51. **Progesterone rapidly decreases brain
edema: treatment delayed up to 24 hours is still effective.** Roof RL,
Duvdevani R, Heyburn JW, Stein DG.

Mol Chem Neuropathol 1997 May;31(1):1-11. **Progesterone protects against
lipid peroxidation following traumatic brain injury in rats.** Roof RL,
Hoffman SW, Stein DG.

Jiang N, et al. **Progesterone is neuroprotective after transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion in male rats.** Brain Res. 1996 Sep 30;735(1):101-7.

Roof RL, et al. **Progesterone rapidly decreases brain edema: treatment
delayed up to 24 hours is still effective.** Exp Neurol. 1996
Apr;138(2):246-51.

Duvdevani R, et al. **Blood-brain barrier breakdown and edema formation
following frontal cortical contusion: does hormonal status play a role?** J
Neurotrauma. 1995 Feb;12(1):65-75.

Exp Neurol 1997 Dec;148(2):453-63. **Endogenous repair after spinal cord
contusion injuries in the rat.** Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC, Komon J, Tovar CA,
Van Meter M, Anderson DK, Faden AI, Hsu CY, Noble LJ, Salzman S, Young W.
**"In addition to signs of regeneration, we noted evidence for the
proliferation of cells located in the ependymal zone surrounding the central
canal at early times following contusion injuries."**

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

