![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Estrogen and Osteoporosis**  
  
_"How does estrogen enhance endotoxin toxicity? Let me count the ways."  
J.J. Maher (Liver Center and Department of Medicine, University of California
San Francisco) in Hepatology, 1998, 28(6):1720-1._  
  
The government declared victory in the war on cancer, though the age-specific
death rate from cancer keeps increasing. In the equally well publicized effort
to prevent disability and death from osteoporosis, no one is declaring
victory, because the only trend in its incidence that has been reported is an
increase. The estrogen-promoting culture tells us that this is because of the
aging of the population, but the age corrected numbers still show a great
increase--for example, in Finland between 1970 and 1995, the number of women
(for a given population of women older than 60) breaking their forearm because
of osteoporosis more than doubled (Palvanen, et al., 1998). That this happened
during a time when the use of estrogen had become much more common doesn't
present a good argument for the protective effects of estrogen treatment. (And
during this period there was a large increase in the consumption of estrogenic
soy products.) Recently our local newspaper had a story at the bottom of the
front page reporting that lean women who used estrogen and synthetic
progestins had an 80% higher rate of breast cancer. Several days later, across
the top of the front page, there was a rebuttal article, quoting some doctors
including a "world class expert on hormone replacement therapy" and a woman
who has taken Premarin for forty years and urges everyone to take it. The
"protection against osteoporosis" and against heart disease, they said, must
be weighed against a trifle such as the 80% increase in cancer. It appeared
that the newspaper was apologizing for reporting a fact that could make
millions of women nervous. (Jan 26, Register-Guard).  
  
Medical magazines, like the mass media, don't like to miss any opportunity to
inform the public about the importance of using estrogen to prevent
osteoporosis. Their attention to the bone-protective effect of progesterone
has been noticeably less than their mad campaign to sell estrogen, despite the
evidence that progesterone can promote bone rebuilding, rather than just
slowing its loss. Although I have spoken about progesterone and osteoporosis
frequently in the last 25 years, I have only occasionally considered what
estrogen does to bones; generally, I described estrogen as a stress-promoting
and age-promoting hormone. In the 1970s, pointing out progesterone's
protective antagonism to excessive amounts of other hormones, and that the
catabolic glucocorticoids tend to increase with aging, I began referring to
progesterone as the "anticatabolic" hormone that should be used to prevent
stress-induced atrophy of skin, bones, brain, etc.  
  
A former editor of Yearbook of Endocrinology had reviewed a series of studies
showing that excess prolactin can cause osteoporosis. Then, he presented a
group of studies showing how estrogen promotes the secretion of prolactin, and
can cause hyperprolactinemia. In that review, he wryly wondered how something
that increases something that causes osteoporosis could prevent osteoporosis.  
  
Women have a higher incidence of osteoporosis than men do. Young women have
thinner more delicate bones than young men. The women who break bones in old
age are generally the women who had the thinnest bones in youth. Menstrual
irregularities, and luteal defects, that involve relatively high estrogen and
low progesterone, increase bone loss.  
  
Fatter women are less likely to break bones than thinner women. Insulin, which
causes the formation of fat, also stimulates bone growth. Estrogen however,
increases the level of free fatty acids in the blood, indicating that it
antagonizes insulin (insulin decreases the level of free fatty acids), and the
fatty acids themselves strongly oppose the effects of insulin. Estrogen
dominance is widely thought to predispose women to diabetes.  
  
Between the ages of 20 and 40, there is a very considerable increase in the
blood level of estrogen in women. However, bone loss begins around the age of
23, and progesses through the years when estrogen levels are rising.
Osteoarthritis, which involves degeneration of the bones around joints, is
strongly associated with high levels of estrogen, and can be produced in
animals with estrogen treatment.  
  
Thirty years ago, when people were already claiming that estrogen would
prevent or cure osteoporosis, endocrinologists pointed out that there was no
x-ray evidence to support the claim. Estrogen can cause a positive calcium
balance, the retention of more calcium than is excreted, and the estrogen
promoters argued that this showed it was being stored in the bones, but the
endocrine physiologists showed that estrogen causes the retention of calcium
by soft tissues. There are many reasons for not wanting calcium to accumulate
in the soft tissues; this occurs normally in aging and stress.  
  
Then, it was discovered that, although estrogen doesn't improve the activity
of the cells that build bone, it can reduce the activity of the cells that
remove bone, the osteoclasts. The osteoclast is a type of phagocytic cell, and
is considered to be a macrophage, the type of cell that can be found in any
organ, which can eat any sort of particle, and which secretes substances
(cytokines, hormone-like proteins) that modify the functions of other cells.
When estrogen was found to impair the activity of this kind of cell, there
wasn't much known about macrophage cytokines.  
  
With the clear evidence that estrogen inhibits the osteoclasts without
activating the bone-building osteoblasts, estrogen was said to "prevent bone
loss," and from that point on we never heard again about estrogen promoting a
positive calcium balance. Calcium retention by soft tissues has come to be an
accepted marker of tissue aging, tissue damage, excitotoxicity, and
degeneration. Positive calcium balance had been the essence of the argument
for using estrogen to prevent osteoporosis: "Women are like chickens, estrogen
makes them store calcium in their bones." But if everyone now recognizes that
calcium isn't being stored in bones, it's better for the estrogen industry if
we forget about the clearly established positive calcium balance produced by
estrogen.  
  
The toxic effects of excessive intracellular calcium (decreased respiration
and increased excitation) are opposed by magnesium. Both thyroid and
progesterone improve magnesium retention. Estrogen dominance is often
associated with magnesium deficiency, which can be an important factor in
osteoporosis (Abraham and Grewal, 1990; Muneyyirci-Delale, et al., 1999). As
part of the campaign to get women to use estrogen, an x-ray (bone density)
test was devised which can supposedly measure changes in the mineral content
of bone. However, it happens that fat and water interfere with the
measurements. Estrogen changes the fat and water content of tissues. By
chance, the distortions produced by fat and water happen to be such that
estrogen could appear to be increasing the density of a bone, when it is
really just altering the soft tissues. Ultrasound measurements can provide
very accurate measurements of bone density, without the fat and water
artifacts that can produce misleading results in the x-ray procedure, and
don't expose the patient to radiation, but the ultrasound method is seldom
used.  
  
In recent years, there has been quite a lot of research into the effects of
the macrophage cytokines. Immune therapy for cancer was considered quackery
when Lawrence Burton identified some substances in blood serum that could
cause massive tumors in rodents to disappear in just a few hours. One of the
serum factors was called Tumor Necrosis Factor, TNF. An official committee was
formed to evaluate his work, but it reported that there was nothing to it. A
member of the committee later became known as "the authority" on tumor
necrosis factor, which was thought to have great potential as an anticancer
drug. However, used by itself, TNF killed only a few cancers, but it damaged
every organ of the body, usually causing the tissues to waste away. Other
names, lymphotoxin and cachectin, reflected its toxic actions on healthy
tissues.  
  
Aging involves many changes that tend to increase the inflammatory reaction,
and generally the level of TNF increases with aging. Although cancer, heart
failure, AIDS, and extreme hormone deficiency (from loss of the pituitary or
thyroid gland, for example) can cause cachexia of an extreme and rapid sort,
ordinary aging is itself a type of cachexia. Progeria, or premature aging, is
a kind of wasting disease that causes a child's tissues (including bones) to
atrophy, and to change in many of the ways that would normally occur in
extreme old age.  
  
Recent studies have found that both men and women lose minerals from their
bones at the rate of about 1% per year. Although men have lower estrogen in
youth than women do, their bones are much heavier. During aging, as their
bones get thinner, men's estrogen levels keep rising.  
  
Besides having weaker bones, old people have weaker muscles, and are more
likely to injure themselves in a fall because their muscles don't react as
well. Muscle loss occurs at about the rate of 1% per year.  
  
Women's muscles, like their bones, are normally smaller than men's, and
estrogen contributes significantly to these differences.  
  
TNF can produce very rapid loss of tissue including bone, and in general, it
rises with aging. Some of the people who like to say that "osteoporosis is
caused by estrogen deficiency" know about the destructive actions of TNF, and
argue that it rises at menopause "because of estrogen deficiency." There are
very good reasons for rejecting that argument; the experiments sometimes seem
to have been designed purely for propaganda purposes, using toxic levels of
estrogen for a specific result.  
  
One researcher noted that the effects of estrogen on cells in vitro are
biphasic: Low doses increased TNF, high doses decreased TNF. Everyone knows
that unphysiologically high doses (50 or 100 or more times above the
physiological level of around 0.25 micrograms per liter) of estrogen are toxic
to cells, producing functional and structural changes, and even rapid death.
So, when a researcher who wants to show estrogen's "bone protective" effect of
lowering TNF adds a lethal dose of estrogen to his cell culture, he can
conclude that "estrogen inhibits TNF production." But the result is no more
interesting than the observation that a large dose of cyanide inhibits
breathing.  
  
TNF is produced by endotoxin, and estrogen increases the amount of endotoxin
in the blood. Even without endotoxin, though, estrogen can stimulate the
production of TNF. Lactic acid and unsaturated fats and hypoxia can stimulate
increased formation of TNF. Estrogen increases production of nitric oxide
systemically, and nitric oxide can stimulate TNF formation. How does TNF work,
to produce tissue damage and wasting? It causes cells to take up too much
calcium, which makes them hypermetabolic before it kills them. It increases
formation of nitric oxide and carbon monoxide, blocking respiration. TNF can
cause a 19.5 fold increased in the enzyme which produces carbon monoxide
(Rizzardini, et al., 1993), which blocks respiration.  
  
All of the normal conditions associated with high estrogen also are found to
involve increased production of TNF, and treatment of animals with estrogen
clearly increases their TNF. Premature ovarian failure (with low estrogen
levels) leads to reduced TNF, as does treatment with antiestrogens. If bone
resorption is significantly regulated by TNF, then it should be concluded that
increased estrogenic influence will tend to produce osteoporosis.  
  
Tamoxifen, which has some estrogenic effects, including the inhibition of
osteoclasts, can kill osteoclasts when the dose is high enough. The inhibition
of osteoclast activity by either estrogen or tamoxifen is probably a toxic
action, that has been characterized as "beneficial" by the estrogen industry
simply because they didn't have any better argument for getting women to use
their products.  
  
Some types of dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease, involve a life-long
process of degeneration of the brain, with an inflammatory component, that
probably makes them comparable to osteoporosis and muscle-wasting. (In the
brain, the microglia, which are similar to macrophages, and the astrocytes,
can produce TNF.) The importance of the inflammatory process in Alzheimer's
disease was appreciated when it was noticed that people who used aspirin
regularly had a low incidence of that dementia. Aspirin inhibits the formation
of TNF, and aspirin has been found to retard bone loss. In the case of
osteoporosis (A. Murrillo-Uribe, 1999), as in Alzheimer's disease, the
incidence is two or three times as high in women as in men. In both
Alzheimer's disease and osteoporosis, the estrogen industry is arguing that
the problems are caused by a suddenly developing estrogen deficiency, rather
than by prolonged exposure to estrogen.  
  
Similar arguments were made fifty years ago regarding the nature of the
menopause itself--that it was caused by a sudden decrease in estrogen
production. The evidence that has accumulated in the last forty years has
decisively settled that argument: Menopause is the result of prolonged
exposure to estrogen. (Even one large dose destroys certain areas in the
brain, and chronic, natural levels damage the nerves that regulate the
pituitary. Overactivity of the pituitary leads to many other features of
aging.)  
  
The links between estrogen and TNF appear to be essential factors in aging and
its diseases. Each of these substances has its constructive, but limited,
place in normal physiology, but as excitatory factors, they must operate
within the appropriate constraints. The basic constraint is that resources,
including energy and oxygen, must be available to terminate their excitatory
actions. Adequate oxygen, a generous supply of carbon dioxide, saturated fats,
thyroid, and progesterone restrain TNF, while optimizing other cytokines and
immune functions, including thymic protection. In the development of the
organism and its adaptive functions, there are patterned processes, functional
systems, that can clarify the interactions of growth and atrophy. The
respiratory production of energy and carbon dioxide, and the respiratory
defect in which lactic acid is produced, correspond to successful adaptation,
and to stressful/excitotoxic maladaptation, respectively. Excitotoxicity, and
Meerson's work on the protective functions of the antistress hormones, have to
be understood in this framework. This framework integrates the understanding
of cancer metabolism with the other stress metabolisms, and with the
metabolism of normal growth.  
  
Unsaturated fats, iron, and lactic acid are closely related to the actions and
regulation of TNF, and therefore they strongly influence the nature of stress
and the rate of aging.  
  
The fact that cancer depends on the presence of polyunsaturated fats probably
relates to the constructive and destructive actions of TNF: The destructive
effects such as multiple organ failure/congestive heart failure/shock-lung,
etc., apparently involve arachidonic acid and its metabolites, which are based
on the so-called essential fatty acids. When oxygen and the correct nutrients
are available, the hypermetabolism produced by TNF could be reparative (K.
Fukushima, et al., 1999), rather than destructive. Stimulation in the presence
of oxygen produces carbon dioxide, allowing cells to excrete calcium and to
deposit it in bones, but stimulation in the absence of oxygen produces lactic
acid and causes cellular calcium uptake.  
  
It is in this context that the therapeutic effects of saturated fats, carbon
dioxide, progesterone, and thyroid can be understood. They restore stability
to a system that has been stimulated beyond its capacity to adapt without
injury.  
  
**REFERENCES**  
  
J Reprod Med 1990 May;35(5):503-7. A total dietary program emphasizing
magnesium instead of calcium. Effect on the mineral density of calcaneous bone
in postmenopausal women on hormonal therapy. Abraham GE, Grewal H. J Immunol
1999 Feb 15;162(4):2154-61. Increased TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis in
lymphocytes from aged humans: changes in TNF-alpha receptor expression and
activation of caspases. Aggarwal S, Gollapudi S, Gupta S.  
  
Mech Ageing Dev 1995 Oct 13;84(2):113-26. Cytokine production and lymphocyte
subpopulations in aged humans. An assessment during nocturnal sleep. Born J,
Uthgenannt D, Dodt C, Nunninghoff D, Ringvolt E, Wagner T, Fehm HL. "While
monocyte counts were unchanged in the elderly production of IL-1 beta and TNF-
alpha mainly derived from these cells, was enhanced (p < 0.05). Results
indicate a state of enhanced responsiveness of the T cell compartment and of
monocytes in aged which may compensate for the substantial decrease in T
cells."  
  
Eur J Appl Physiol 1999 Oct;80(5):452-60 Impact of three different types of
exercise on components of the inflammatory response. Brenner IK, Natale VM,
Vasiliou P, Moldoveanu AI, Shek PN, Shephard RJ.  
  
J Surg Res 1994 Jul;57(1):65-8. Dietary fish oil enhances macrophage
production of nitric oxide. Chaet MS, Garcia VF, Arya G, Ziegler MM. "In group
A, BAM from animals fed omega 3 produced significantly more NO . . . and TNF .
. . than BAM from omega 6-fed animals." "These data demonstrate that PUFA
influence BAM production of NO and TNF. Changes in the omega 6-derived
prostanoids may account for the differences in TNF production, but these data
suggest that PGE2 and PGI2 are not responsible for the observed differences in
NO production."  
  
J Immunol 1996 Feb 15;156(4):1525-30. Age-associated differences in TNF-alpha
and nitric oxide production in endotoxic mice. Chorinchath BB, Kong LY, Mao L,
McCallum RE.  
  
Am J Physiol 1999 Sep;277(3 Pt 1):G671-7. Estriol sensitizes rat Kupffer cells
via gut-derived endotoxin. Enomoto N, Yamashina S, Schemmer P, Rivera CA,
Bradford BU, Enomoto A, Brenner DA, Thurman RG  
  
Scand J Gastroenterol 1999, Mar; 34(3):291-6. Lipopolysaccharide- and
proinflammatory cytokine-induced energy production in intestinal and colonic
epithelial cell lines. Fukushima K, Sasaki I, Takahashi K, Naito H, Matsuno S.  
  
Mech Ageing Dev 1995 Sep 29;84(1):39-54 Age-related enhancement of tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) production in mice. Han D, Hosokawa T, Aoike A, Kawai K
"We previously reported that systemic production of TNF increases with aging.
The present study of TNF production at the cellular level in mice indicated
(1) that TNF production per macrophage increased with aging, and (2) that the
number of T and B cells involved in the production of TNF in the presence of
macrophages also increased at least up to middle age." J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1996 Feb;81(2):513-8. Cytokine production in the bone marrow microenvironment:
failure to demonstrate estrogen regulation in early postmenopausal women.
Kassem M, Khosla S, Spelsberg TC, Riggs BL Fertil Steril 1999
May;71(5):869-72. Serum ionized magnesium and calcium in women after
menopause: inverse relation of estrogen with ionized magnesium. Muneyyirci-
Delale O, Nacharaju VL, Dalloul M, Altura BM, Altura BT.  
  
Ginecol Obstet Mex 1999 May;67:227-33. [Osteoporosis in Mexican postmenopausal
women. Magnitude of the problem. Multicenter study]. Murrillo-Uribe A, Deleze-
Hinojosa M, Aguirre E, Villa A, Calva J, Cons F, Briseno A, Gonzalez G,
Morales J, Pena H, Guerrero G, Orozco J, Morales G, Elizondo J.  
  
Hepatology 1997 Dec;26(6):1538-45. Dietary saturated fatty acids down-regulate
cyclooxygenase-2 and tumor necrosis factor alfa and reverse fibrosis in
alcohol-induced liver disease in the rat. Nanji AA, Zakim D, Rahemtulla A,
Daly T, Miao L, Zhao S, Khwaja S, Tahan SR, Dannenberg AJ. "The data indicate
that a diet enriched in saturated fatty acids (groups 3 and 4) effectively
reverses alcohol-induced liver injury, including fibrosis. The therapeutic
effects of saturated fatty acids may be explained, at least in part, by
reduced endotoxemia and lipid peroxidation, which in turn result in decreased
levels of TNF-alpha and Cox-2." Eur J Epidemiol 1998 Feb;14(2):159-64. Secular
trends in the osteoporotic fractures of the distal humerus in elderly women.
Palvanen M, Kannus P, Niemi S, Parkkari J.  
  
Biochem J 1993 Mar 1;290 ( Pt 2):343-7. Cytokine induction of haem oxygenase
mRNA in mouse liver. Interleukin 1 transcriptionally activates the haem
oxygenase gene. Rizzardini M, Terao M, Falciani F, Cantoni L. Nitric Oxide
1997;1(6):453-62..Effects of female hormones (17beta-estradiol and
progesterone) on nitric oxide production by alveolar macrophages in rats.
Robert R, Spitzer JA.  
  
Nitric Oxide 1997;1(6):453-62.. Effects of female hormones (17beta-estradiol
and progesterone) on nitric oxide production by alveolar macrophages in rats.
Robert R, Spitzer JA.  
  
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1998 Jan;53(1):M20-6. Monocyte cytokine
production in an elderly population: effect of age and inflammation. Roubenoff
R, Harris TB, Abad LW, Wilson PW, Dallal GE, Dinarello CA. "OBJECTIVE: To
determine the association among aging, inflammation, and cytokine production
by peripheral blood mononuclear cells." "We examined production of
interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), IL-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), and IL-6 in 711 elderly participants in the
Framingham Heart Study (mean age, 79 y) and 21 young healthy volunteers (mean
age, 39 y)." CONCLUSION: "Production of IL-6 and IL-1Ra--but not IL-1 beta or
TNF-alpha--was increased in the elderly compared to healthy, young subjects.
The increase in IL-6 also correlated with increased production of CRP, a
marker of inflammation. However, IL-1Ra was increased in the elderly
independently of CRP production. Although limited by the small control group,
these data suggest that dysregulation of some inflammatory cytokines occurs
with age, but the role of inflammation in aging remains unclear."  
  
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1998 Jan;53(1):M20-6. MMonocyte cytokine
production in an elderly population: effect of age and inflammation. Roubenoff
R, Harris TB, Abad LW, Wilson PW, Dallal GE, Dinarello CA. Br J Cancer Suppl
1996 Jul;27:S133-5. The influence of oxygen and carbon dioxide tension on the
production of TNF alpha by activated macrophages. Sampson LE, Chaplin DJ.  
  
Mech Ageing Dev 1997 Feb;93(1-3):87-94. Calorie restriction inhibits the age-
related dysregulation of the cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-6 in C3B10RF1 mice.
Spaulding CC, Walford RL, Effros RB. "TNF-alpha and IL-6 are generally
increased in the sera of aged humans and mice. The dysregulation of these
cytokines may be critical in autoreactivity and immune dysfunction." "Serum
levels of both cytokines were significantly higher in old versus young mice.
However, in old mice subjected to long term CR the serum levels were
comparable to those of young mice. The potential involvement of normalization
of TNF-alpha and IL-6 levels in the life extension effect of CR are
discussed."  
  
Cytokine 1999 May; 11(5):326-33. Induction of haem oxygenase contributes to
the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines in re-oxygenated rat macrophages:
role of cGMP. Tamion F, Richard V, Lyoumi S, Hiron M, Bonmarchand G, Leroy J,
Daveau M, Thuillez C, Lebreton JP. Clin Sci (Colch) 1994 Aug;87(2):173-8.
Complex modulation of cytokine induction by endotoxin and tumour necrosis
factor from peritoneal macrophages of rats by diets containing fats of
different saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acid
composition. Tappia PS, Grimble RF.  
  
Infect Immun 1996 Mar;64(3):769-74. Lipopolysaccharide-induced lethality and
cytokine production in aged mice. Tateda K, Matsumoto T, Miyazaki S, Yamaguchi
K  
  
Hepatology 2000 Jan;31(1):117-23. Estrogen is involved in early alcohol-
induced liver injury in a rat enteral feeding model. Yin M, Ikejima K, Wheeler
MD, Bradford BU, Seabra V, Forman DT, Sato N, Thurman RG. "Blood endotoxin and
hepatic levels of CD14 messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein were increased by
ethanol. This effect was blocked in ovariectomized rats and elevated by
estrogen replacement. Moreover, Kupffer cells isolated from ethanol-treated
rats with estrogen replacement produced more tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-
alpha) than those from control and ovariectomized rats. It is concluded,
therefore, that the sensitivity of rat liver to alcohol-induced injury is
directly related to estrogen, which increases endotoxin in the blood and CD14
expression in the liver, leading to increased TNF-alpha production."  
  
Shock 1998 Dec;10(6):436-41. Acetazolamide treatment prevents in vitro
endotoxin-stimulated tumor necrosis factor release in mouse macrophages. West
MA, LeMieur TL, Hackam D, Bellingham J, Claire L, Rodriguez JL. Hepatology
2000 Jan;31(1):117-23. Estrogen is involved in early alcohol-induced liver
injury in a rat enteral feeding model. Yin M, Ikejima K, Wheeler MD, Bradford
BU, Seabra V, Forman DT, Sato N, Thurman RG Anim Reprod Sci 1998 Feb
27;50(1-2):57-67. Elevation in tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)
messenger RNA levels in the uterus of pregnant gilts after oestrogen
treatment. Yu Z, Gordon JR, Kendall J, Thacker PA Immunology 1995
Sep;86(1):18-24. In vivo modulation of murine serum tumour necrosis factor and
interleukin-6 levels during endotoxemia by oestrogen agonists and antagonists.
Zuckerman SH, Bryan-Poole N, Evans GF, Short L, Glasebrook AL. "Oestrogen
treatment resulted in a significant increase in serum TNF while serum IL-6
levels, relative to the placebo group, decreased in response to an endotoxin
challenge."  
  
Inflammation 1996 Dec;20(6):581-97. Estriol: a potent regulator of TNF and
IL-6 expression in a murine model of endotoxemia. Zuckerman SH, Ahmari SE,
Bryan-Poole N, Evans GF, Short L, Glasebrook AL.  
  
Proc Assoc Am Physicians 1996 Mar;108(2):155-64 Potential mechanism of
estrogen-mediated decrease in bone formation: estrogen increases production of
inhibitory insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-4. Kassem M, Okazaki R,
De Leon D, Harris SA, Robinson JA, Spelsberg TC, Conover CA, Riggs BL.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

