![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Fatigue, aging, and recuperation** **  
**  
===================================  
\- Old people and sick people tire easily. Surprisingly, little is known to
explain that common fact.  
\- Myths about lactic acid and oxygen debt have misdirected most fatigue
research.  
\- The cellular processes involved in fatigue overlap with those of aging.  
\- Knowledge about the mechanisms of fatigue should be useful in preventing
some tissue swelling disorders, organ failure, degenerative calcification, and
other energy-related problems.  
  
===================================  
  
GLOSSARY:  
* Uncoupling--In cellular respiration, oxidation of "fuel" in the mitochondrion is coupled to the phosphorylation of ADP, forming ATP. Uncouplers are chemicals that allow oxidation to proceed without producing the usual amount of ATP.  
* DNP--Dinitrophenol, an uncoupler that was once popular as a weight-loss drug.  
* NAD+ and NADH--Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, and its reduced form are coenzymes for many oxidation and reduction reactions in cells.  
* Hyperammonemia--The presence of too much ammonia in the blood.  
* Vicinal water--water near surfaces, especially hydrophobic surfaces, that is physically and chemically different from ordinary water.  
* Hydrophobic--insoluble in water, a nonpolar oil-like molecule that repels water.  
  
===================================  
  
Unlike the somewhat technical medical concept of "stress," the idea of fatigue
is something everyone understands, to some extent. Hans Selye's studies of
stress weren't widely accepted until about 40 years after their publication,
but some of the main investigators of the fatigue phenomenon are still
practically unknown in the universities, many years after they published their
work.  
  
Several things have kept fatigue research from advancing, including the common
feeling that fatigue is already sufficiently understood, and that it is
somehow trivial, compared to problems such as growth, reproduction, and
disease.  
  
Fatigue is usually described as decreased responsiveness resulting from over-
exertion: For example, a muscle's decreased strength or speed of contraction,
or a nerve's decreased speed of conduction, or a sense organ's decreased
ability to detect or to discriminate. Another meaning of fatigue, a decreased
resistance or strength, can be applied to materials, as well as to some
biological functions, for example when fatigue leads to sickness or
infections.  
  
"Responsiveness" implies sensitivity, and decreased sensitivity to stimulation
can be seen in fatigued sense organs, nerves, muscles, and many other types of
cell--immune cells, secretory cells, etc. Even plant cells have very similar
processes of excitability that can be depleted by repetition.  
  
In a series of lectures to the Royal Society in England (1895-1901), the
physicist Jagadis Chandra Bose described work that at first excited, and then
disturbed, many physicists and biologists. He had invented devices for both
producing and detecting electromagnetic waves, and he had been the first to
produce millimeter length radio waves (microwaves). In Marconi's first
transatlantic radio transmission Bose's signal detecting device was used. This
device was based on the fact that two pieces of metal in superficial contact
became electrically fused (cohered) in the presence of an electrical or
electromagnetic field. After they cohered, a mechanical shock would separate
them, breaking the electrical fusion.  
  
When Bose was experimenting with his "self-restoring coherer," a
semiconducting device that spontaneously broke the connection without being
mechanically shaken, he observed that it became insensitive after prolonged
use, that is, it lost its self-restoring capacity, but that after a rest, it
recovered its sensitivity. He recognized the complex behavior of his
instrument as being very similar to the electrical physiology of living cells.  
  
He then began a series of experiments on plants, animals, and minerals, that
showed similar responses to all kinds of stimulation, including mechanical and
thermal and electromagnetic.  
  
The idea of metal fatigue wasn't new, but Bose was able to think far beyond
the ideas of the metallurgists. Biologists were thinking of electrical
responsiveness as a defining feature of life, and Bose demonstrated that
plants had electrical responsiveness very similar to that of animals, but also
that similar reactions could be demonstrated in minerals.  
  
This was what disturbed the English scientists. Sensitivity, irritability,
fatigue, and memory were supposed to be special properties related to life,
and maybe to consciousness. For the Englishmen, there were religious
implications in this Hindu's research.  
  
There were several reasons that European and American scientists couldn't
accept the universal nature of the electrical properties that they were
studying in animals. One of their motives was to see life as something
immaterial, or of an absolutely different nature than inorganic matter.
Another problem had to do with the developing belief that the special
properties of life were enclosed in the hereditary substance of each cell, and
that the electrical functions of cells were produced entirely by the presence
of a membrane, surrounding a drop of water containing randomly moving
dissolved chemicals. For the membrane electricity theory, it was essential to
believe in the random behavior of things dissolved in the cell water.  
  
So they considered the electrical-mechanical reactions and interactions of
minerals to be so unlike the processes of life that it was inappropriate to
see analogies between them. Minerals were composed of atoms, and, according to
the doctrine of the time, they could have no "physiological" functions except
on the atomic scale. It was more than 20 years before mainstream physicists
began thinking about "delocalized" forces and fields in minerals.  
  
Between 1915 and 1934, Michael Polanyi made many observations that made it
clear that the old kind of electrical atomism was completely unfounded. The
behavior of mineral crystals, and the interactions between different phases of
material, such as gas or liquid with a solid, could be understood only in
terms of relatively long-range forces. Polanyi's experiments showed, for
example, that events on the surface of a crystal modified the strength and
deformability of the crystal.  
  
Many others between 1900 and 1940-- Lepeschkin, Nasonov, Bungenberg de Jong,
and Solco Tromp, for example--argued that the sensitivity of protoplasm had to
be understood in terms of long range order, something like a liquid
crystalline state of matter that would require some of the kinds of knowledge
of matter that were being developed by physicists, metallurgists, and a
variety of others investigating the condensed states of matter.  
  
But the mainstream biologists preferred to describe cells in terms that would
make impossible any of the responsivities or sensitivities seen in the
"simple" solid state of minerals. To defend their ideology of the
immateriality of life, they denied that the subtlest features of matter had
anything to do with life, reducing life to a debased set of special, merely
theoretical, mechanisms. The now defunct physical theory of merely localized
atomic electrical forces became the paradigm for the new biology. The many
demonstrations of coherent, ordered physical behavior of the cytoplasm, for
example Gurwitch's mitogenic radiation, were dismissed with prejudice.  
  
During G. W. Crile's long career (1889-1941), understanding shock, biological
energy, and fatigue were his main concerns. He believed that shock was the
result of brain exhaustion, and in one of his last publications he showed that
the brains from exhausted animals produced less bioluminescence than those
from rested animals. His importance was in demonstrating that fatigue and
shock are systemic conditions of the organism, rather than isolated events in
muscles and nerves. Recent publications are showing the validity of this view.
Crile's approach to the prevention and treatment of shock was based on
isolating the damaged area with local anesthetics. Blocking the nerves from
one injured part of the body, for example the sciatic nerve in the leg, could
preserve energy production (and normal cell functions) throughout the rest of
the body.  
  
About 30 years earlier (1901), Vvedensky had demonstrated that some types of
fatigue appear to be a defensive blocking of responsiveness, such that intense
stimulation would produce no response, while weak stimulation could sometimes
produce a response. These changes affected cell functions in a variety of
ways, that he called narcosis and parabiosis.  
  
There have been two popular ways to "explain" fatigue, one by saying that the
cell's energy (usually thought of as ATP or glycogen) is used up, the other
saying that the accumulation of a metabolic product (usually lactic acid)
prevents further functioning. The obvious problem with these explanations is
that the fatigue response is quite independent of those metabolic changes.
Another problem is that those ideas don't explain the real changes that occur
in cells that are demonstrating fatigue.  
  
Fatigued cells take up water, and become heavier. They also become more
permeable, and leak. When more oxygen is made available, they are less
resistant to fatigue, and when the organism is made slightly hypoxic, as at
high altitude, muscles have more endurance, and are stronger, and nerves
conduct more quickly. These facts don't fit with the standard model of the
cell, in which its sensitivity is strictly governed by the behavior of its
"membrane." (For example, how can a membrane leak large molecules at the same
time that it is intact and causing the cell to swell osmotically?) They are
consistent with the model of the cell that treats protoplasm as a special
phase of matter.  
  
Another feature of fatigue (and often of aging, stress, and sickness) is that
the relaxation of muscles is retarded and impaired.  
  
Hypothyroidism causes muscle relaxation to be slowed, both in skeletal muscles
and in the heart. F/Z. Meerson showed that stress causes heart muscles to be
exposed to increased calcium, followed by breakdown of fats and proteins, and
that these changes keep the injured heart in a continuous state of partial
contraction, making it stiff, and resistant to complete contractile
shortening. When many cardiologists talk about the heart's stiffness, they are
thinking of muscular thickening and fibrosis, but those are late consequences
of the kind of contractile, unrelaxed stiffness that Meerson described.  
  
The hypothyroid heart does eventually become fibrotic, but before that, it is
just unable to relax properly, and unable to contract fully. This failure to
empty fully with each contraction is a kind of "heart failure," but it can be
corrected very quickly by supplementing thyroid. Even the fibrotic heart can
recover under the influence of adequate thyroid.  
  
The analogy of the "coherer" would suggest that the overstimulated muscle
isn't able to decohere itself, until it has had a rest. It responds to
stimulation, lets the energy flow, but then can't turn it off, and the energy
keeps flowing, because of a change in physical state.  
  
Albert Szent-Gyorgyi was probably the first person to seriously investigate
the semiconducting properties of living material. Since he was aware of W.F.
Koch's idea of a free radical catalyst to support oxidative metabolism, his
suggestion in 1941 that cellular proteins could function as electrical
conductors (or semiconductors) was very likely based on his research in
cellular respiration, as well as on his work with muscle proteins. He had
observed that ATP lowers the viscosity of a solution of the muscle protein
myosin, and that it would cause a filament formed by precipitating myosin to
contract. The polymerization and contraction of proteins under the influence
of free radicals was at the heart of F.W. Koch's therapeutic ideas, but Koch's
work was about 100 years too early, by medical standards.  
  
Szent-Gyorgyi observed that, although ATP was involved in the contraction of
muscles, its post-mortem disappearance caused the contraction and hardening of
muscles known as rigor mortis. When he put hardened dead muscles into a
solution of ATP, they relaxed and softened. The relaxed state is a state with
adequate energy reserves.  
  
After Szent-Gyorgyi moved to the U.S., in 1947, he demonstrated the effect of
muscle cytoplasm on the behavior of fluorescent substances, which was
analogous to that of ice, until the muscle was stimulated. During contraction,
the fluorescent material behaved as it would in ordinary liquid water. This
effect involved the stabilization of the excited state of electrons. This
single demonstration should have caused biologists to abandon the membrane
theory of cellular excitation, and to return to basic physics for their
understanding of cell behavior. The implications of Szent-Gyorgyi's work were
enormous for biology and medicine, and even for the understanding of
semiconductors, but most of the world was hypnotized by a simple textbook
model of cell membranes.  
  
Szent-Gyorgyi also demonstrated that the combination of properly balanced
electron donors and electron acceptors (D-A pairs) would cause a muscle to
contract. He compared this to "doping" an inorganic superconductor, to
regulate its electronic behavior. Although these experiments were done half a
century after Koch's application of free radical chemistry to medicine, they
still didn't rouse the pharmaceutical industry from its toxic slumber.  
  
I suspect that it was Szent-Gyorgyi's research with those interesting
electronic properties of cellular water and proteins that in 1960 gave Linus
Pauling the idea to explain anesthesia, specifically noble gas anesthesia, in
terms of water clathrate formation, the restructuring of cellular water by the
hydrophobic atom or molecule of an anesthetic. His suggestion caused a
reaction among biologists that discouraged research into the subject for about
40 years.  
  
Gilbert Ling's view of cytoplasmic structure gives a different emphasis to the
function of electrons, which I think is an essential complement to Szent-
Gyorgyi's view. Ling's emphasis is on how the inductive effect of adsorbed
substances (for example, ATP and progesterone has powerful adsorptive effects)
on proteins changes the charge concentration on ionizable groups. When the
charge concentration is in one configuration (more acidic), the preferred
counterion is potassium, and in another (less acidic) configuration, it is
sodium.  
  
Gilbert Ling's biophysical calculations were useful to physical chemists, and
were soon put to practical use for understanding ion exchange resins, such as
water softeners. Many sorts of evidence showed their validity for cell
physiology, but nearly all biologists rejected them, preferring to talk about
membranes, pumps, and channels, despite the evidence showing that the
properties ascribed to those are simply impossible. NMR imaging (MRI) was
developed by Raymond Damadian specifically as an application of Ling's
description of cell physiology.  
  
Although metals are conductors, the function of the coherers of Bose and
others shows that the surface is a semiconductor, that requires the slight
excitation of an electromagnetic wave to become conductive, at which point the
conduction band of electrons in the metal becomes coherent and extends from
one particle into the others. The surface of any phase of a substance has
electronic properties distinct from those of the bulk phase, and in a sense
the interface constitutes a special phase of matter. When the electrons of the
interface lose their special properties, the structure of the whole system
changes.  
  
When a muscle cell is stimulated enough to cause a contraction, the
interruption of its resting phase causes a shift in the charge concentration
on the proteins, potassium ions are exchanged for sodium ions, calcium ions
enter, and phosphate ions separate from ATP, and are replaced by the transfer
of phosphate to ADP from creatine phosphate.  
  
Since the quantum physicist E. Schroedinger wrote his book, Time's Arrow,
people have often thought of life in terms of negentropy, going against the
general tendency of entropy to increase, except for aging and death, which are
seen as obeying a law of increasing entropy. But A. Zotin investigated
organisms, rather than abstractions about electrons, and shows that aging
involves a decrease in entropy, and a slowing of metabolism. The decrease of
entropy with aging, according to his view, would be analogous to
crystallization, a sort of progressive freezing.  
  
When a nerve is stimulated, it releases energy suddenly, and much of this heat
seems to be the result of a change of structure in the cytoplasm, since (in
crustaceans' nerves, which can function at low temperature) during the resting
recovery of the nerve, its temperature goes slightly below the ambient
temperature, despite the release of some heat from the chemical changes of
metabolism, stimulated by the nerve's activity.  
  
When a physical change is endothermic, as the nerve's recovery is, that can be
interpreted as an increase in overall entropy, as when a rubber band
spontaneously contracts, and becomes cooler.  
  
Bose's rested coherer, which, with time, spontaneously recovered its
semiconductive (i.e., relatively insulating) property, wasn't being powered by
metabolism. As the particles returned to their relatively isolated state,
there was a decrease of order, and the change was probably somewhat like the
spontaneous energy change in the stimulated crustacean nerve. I assume the
change would result from the absorption of environmental heat, possibly with
infrared resonance with electron conduction bands.  
  
Seeing the structure of the cytoplasm as something like a spring-driven
mechanism, able to bounce between two states or "phases," makes it easier to
see cellular fatigue as something different from the various metabolic energy
sources, ATP, glycogen, and oxygen, which--contrary to conventional
assumptions--aren't closely tied to the functional losses occurring in
fatigue.  
  
The role of metabolism, then, becomes analogous to the role of the "tapper" in
the early forms of the coherer.  
Water in its normal state is a dielectric. But when it is polarized by an
electrical charge, or by the presence of a phase boundary, its normal state is
altered. This is the special interfacial water, or vicinal water. With the
movement of ions (mainly potassium, sodium, calcium, and magnesium) during
excitation, the state of the cellular water is necessarily changed by the
presence of different substances. In the excited state, cell water is less
hydrophobic, more hydrophilic than in the relaxed state. A network of
"hydrophobic" interactions extends through the relaxed cell. One of the
properties of a dielectric is that it tends to move into the space between
charges, with a force similar in principle to that involved in
dielectrophoresis.  
  
In the resting state, potassium is the main inorganic ion, and it is
associated with acidic groups, such as aspartic and glutamic acid. During
excitation, potassium is partly exchanged for sodium, which becomes the
preferred counter-ion for the acid groups, and calcium enters the cell along
with the sodium. Potassium's interaction with water is very weak (its
hydration has been called negative), allowing water to form the structures
that are stable in the presence of hydrophobic surfaces. Sodium and especially
calcium (smaller atoms, with higher surface charge concentration) powerfully
interact with water molecules, more strongly than water interacts with itself,
disrupting the delicate somewhat hydrophobic structures of the intracellular
water.  
  
(Calcium, with its two charges, has important binding and stabilizing
functions in the resting cell. In the excited cell, these internal calcium
ions are released, while extracellular calcium ions enter the cell.)  
  
With the increased movement of charged particles during the stimulation of a
nerve or muscle, as one kind of counterion is exchanged for another, and the
destruction of some of the water's structure, there are more opportunities for
bulk dielectric water to enter cells, interfering with the arrangement of
proteins, and tending to cause swelling and separation of the structural
elements of the cell. Electron micrographs of fatigued muscle show a
remarkable separation of the actin and myosin proteins.  
  
In the excited state, NMR studies show that cell water behaves more like bulk
water, that is, its molecular movements are relatively free, indicating the
momentary loss of the interfacial state. In this state, the uptake of water,
and the fatigue-related swelling of nerves and muscles, would be driven at
least partly by the principle that a dielectric tends to be pulled into the
spaces separating charges. The bulk water that enters a cell during the
breakdown of vicinal water functions as an extraneous material somewhat beyond
the cell's control.  
  
These bulk-like high dielectric properties of water in the excited cellular
state can explain many changes of enzyme activity. Previously nonpolar lipids
would develop a negative surface charge (from accumulating hydroxyl groups:
Marinova, et al., 1996), which would tend to increase their oxidation and
degradation. With the loss of the interfacial water, the cell's high energy
resting state is replaced by an active mobilization of its resources, to
maintain and restore the cell's structure. Metabolic energy begins to flow
into the processes of restoration, serving the function of the tapper in the
earliest coherers.  
  
Looking at fatigability, muscle contraction, and nerve conduction in a variety
of situations, we can test some of the traditional explanations, and see how
well the newer "bioelectronic" explanations fits the facts. Osmotic pressure,
hydrostatic pressure, atmospheric pressure, and the degree of metabolic
stimulation by thyroid hormone affect fatigue in ways that aren't consistent
with the membrane-electrical doctrine.  
  
The production of lactic acid during intense muscle activity led some people
to suggest that fatigue occurred when the muscle wasn't getting enough oxygen,
but experiments show that fatigue sets in while adequate oxygen is being
delivered to the muscle. Underwater divers sometimes get an excess of oxygen,
and that often causes muscle fatigue and soreness. At high altitudes, where
there is relatively little oxygen, strength and endurance can increase.  
  
An excess of oxygen can slow nerve conduction, while hypoxia can accelerate
it. (Increasing the delivery of oxygen at higher pressure doesn't increase the
cellular use of oxygen or decrease lactic acid production in the exercising
muscle [Kohzuki, et al., 2000], but it will increase lipid peroxidation.)  
  
High hydrostatic pressure causes muscles to contract, though for many years
the membrane-doctrinaires couldn't accept that. Underwater divers experience
brain excitation under very high pressure. Since vicinal water has a larger
volume than ordinary water (analogous to the expansion when ice is formed,
though the volume increase in cell water is slightly less, about 4%, than in
ice, which is 11% more voluminous than liquid water), compression under high
pressure converts vicinal cell water to the state that occurs in the excited
cell, the way ice melts under pressure. The excited state exists as long as
water remains in that state.  
  
These changes of state under pressure are reminiscent of Bose's use of
pressure in some of his coherers, and of the fact that pressure alters the
sensitivity of electrons in a semiconductor, by altering their "band gap," the
amount of energy needed to make them enter the conductive zone.  
  
One of the early demonstrations that cell water undergoes a phase change
during muscle contraction involved simply measuring the volume of an isolated
muscle. With stimulation and contraction, the volume of the muscle decreases
slightly. (The muscle was immersed in water in a sealed chamber, and the
volume decrease in the whole chamber was measured.) This corresponds to the
conversion of vicinal water to bulk-like (dielectric) water. (The threatening
implications of those experiments with spontaneous volume change were very
annoying to many biologists of my professors' generation.)  
  
In the stimulated state, the cell's uptake of water from its environment
coincides closely with its electrical and thermal activity, and its expulsion
of water coincides with its recovery. In a small nerve fiber, or near the
surface of a larger fiber, these changes are very fast, and in a large muscle
the uptake of water is faster than the flow of water from capillaries can
match, but it will become massive if stimulation is continued for several
minutes. For example, two minutes of stimulation can cause a muscle's overall
weight to increase by 6%, but its extracellular compartment loses 4%, so the
muscle cells gain much more than 6% of their weight in that short time (Ward,
et al., 1996). The water that is taken up by cells is taken from the blood,
which becomes relatively dehydrated and thicker in the process.  
  
The belief in "semipermeable membranes" (which hasn't been a viable
explanation of cell physiology for a very long time) forces people to explain
cell swelling osmotically, which means that they simply assume that the number
of solute particles inside the cell has drastically increased in a very short
time. In Tasaki's experiments (1980, 1981, 1982), the swelling in a nerve
coincides with the electrical action potential, which, according to the
osmotic explanation, means that a very large increase in internal osmolarity
happened in essentially no time. The action potential comes and goes in about
2 milliseconds. The swelling also coincides with heat production and
shortening of the nerve fiber. The shrinkage of the nerve fiber after the end
of the action potential may be just as rapid, and the membrane theory offers
no explanation for that, either. (But the restoration of the unswollen state
can be very prolonged, depending on conditions extrinsic to the particular
muscle or cell.) Troshin's survey of the theory of osmotic regulation of cell
volume showed that the idea of the cell as a membrane osmometer was false, but
very few biologists read his book.  
  
Since the excited or fatigued muscle or nerve swells and gains weight, it's
interesting to see what happens to their sensitivity and strength when they
are exposed to hypotonic solutions that tend to promote swelling, or to
hypertonic solutions, that help to prevent swelling.  
  
In a hypotonic solution, cells are excited (Lang, et al., 1995: "Exposure of
aortic strips from guinea-pigs to hypotonic extracellular fluid is followed by
marked vasoconstriction..."), but the early excitation is followed by
decreased responsiveness (Ohba, et al., 1984: "Exposure of muscle to hypotonic
solutions [70% of normal solution] produced initially a transient increase in
twitch after which twitch declined below the control level"). Hypertonic
solutions tend to produce relaxation in normal muscles, including the aorta
(Tabrizchi, 1999), but when muscle function is impaired (especially in the
circulatory system, as in shock) they improve contractile function (Elgjo, et
al., 1998: "The maximum contraction force measured in isolated right papillary
muscles ex vivo was significantly greater in HSD-treated than normal saline-
treated animals"). Athletes can lose 4% of their weight by dehydration without
decreasing their muscular strength.  
  
Hypothyroidism tends to cause loss of sodium from the blood, and the
hyponatremia sometimes leads to a generalized hypotonicity of the body fluids.
The thyroid hormone itself functions as an antioxidant, but much of its
protective effect against cell damage is probably the result of preventing
cell swelling and accelerating the removal of calcium from the cell.
(Swelling, like fatigue, causes intracellular calcium to increase.)  
  
The electrical surface charging of lipids in bulk water probably accounts for
the increased lipid peroxidation that occurs in fatigue, edema, and
hypothyroidism, when water loses its normal partial hydrophobicity. Increased
carbon dioxide is known to decrease lipid peroxidation, and its production
requires adequate thyroid function.  
  
Thyroid stimulation of oxygen consumption tends to prevent lactic acid
production, because it keeps the cytoplasm in a state of relative oxidation,
i.e., it keeps the concentration of NAD+ hundreds of times higher than that of
NADH. NADH is required for the conversion of pyruvate to lactate. It is also
the source of reducing potential in many kinds of toxic redox cycling, that
generate lipid peroxides, and it maintains the sulfhydryl system, involving
the balance of reduced glutathione with the sulfhydryl-disulfide system of
protein bonds, which governs the cell's electronic state and affects its
balance of hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity.  
  
The harmful lipid oxidation interferes with energy production and regulatory
processes, and is responsible for some of the prolonged effects of fatigue,
swelling, and hypothyroidism. These lingering effects of lipid oxidation are
undoubtedly amplified by the presence of larger amounts of unstable
polyunsaturated fats, as the energy demands of the fatigued state mobilize
free fatty acids from the tissues.  
  
One of the oldest tests for hypothyroidism was the Achilles tendon reflex
test, in which the rate of relaxation of the calf muscle corresponded to
thyroid function--the relaxation is slow in hypothyroid people. Water, sodium
and calcium are more slowly expelled by the hypothyroid muscle. Exactly the
same slow relaxation occurs in the hypothyroid heart muscle, contributing to
congestive heart failure, because the semi-contracted heart can't receive as
much blood as the normally relaxed heart. The hypothyroid blood vessels are
unable to relax properly, contributing to hypertension. Hypothyroid nerves
don't easily return to their energized relaxed state, leading to insomnia,
paresthesias, movement disorders, and nerves that are swollen and very
susceptible to pressure damage.  
  
With aging, hypothyroidism, stress, and fatigue, the amount of estrogen in the
body typically rises. Estrogen is catabolic for muscle, and causes systemic
edema, and nerve excitation. It weakens muscle contraction in the bladder,
although it lowers the threshold for stimulation of sensation and contraction
(Dambros, et al., 2004). This is the pattern that causes people to wake up
frequently, to pass a small amount of urine. (Progesterone has the opposite
effect in the urinary bladder, raising the threshold of response, but
strengthening contraction, as it does in the gallbladder.) Estrogen lowers
stimulation threshold in the gallbladder, as it does in the brain. Part of its
excitatory action might be the result of increased hypotonic tissue water, but
its effects on nerve thresholds are practically instantaneous.  
  
In 1971 and '72, I gave some of the reasons for thinking that estrogen's
biological effects result from its direct effects on cell water, causing it to
become more like bulk (high dielectric) water. For example, NMR (spin echo) of
estrogen treated uterus and of the uterus from an old animal were closer to
bulk water than that of a young animal. Estrogen, like fatigue or excessive
oxygen, slows nerve conduction.  
Lactic acid production increases with fatigue, aging, hypothyroidism, estrogen
excess, and other inefficient biological states. Its presence, when oxygen is
available, indicates that something is interfering with efficient oxidative
energy metabolism. Ammonia, free fatty acids, and various inflammatory
cytokines are also likely to increase in those stress states.  
  
A dangerously high level of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia) can be
produced by exhaustive exercise, but also by hyperbaric oxygen (or a high
concentration of oxygen), by high estrogen, and by hypothyroidism. It tends to
be associated with an excess of lactic acid, probably because ammonia
stimulates glycolysis. Excess oxygen, like hypothyroidism, is equivalent to
"hyperventilation," in producing an abnormally low level of carbon dioxide in
the blood. The Krebs cycle, during stress, is limited by the unavailability of
carbon dioxide. These factors result in the waste of glucose, turning it into
lactic acid, rather than carbon dioxide and energy. In these ways, the
metabolism of fatigued muscle (or any cell under stress) is similar to tumor
metabolism.  
  
Hyperammonemia disturbs excitatory processes, and can cause seizures, as well
as stupor, and is probably involved in mania and depression. Lithium happens
to complex electronically with ammonia, and I think that accounts for some of
its therapeutic effects, but carbon dioxide is the main physiological factor
in the elimination of ammonia, since it combines with it to form urea. The
changes in cell water in the excited/fatigued state represent an increase in
the water's "structural temperature," and that would imply that less carbon
dioxide could remain dissolved during excitation.  
  
Eating sugar and using caffeine, which increases the oxidation of sugar (Yeo,
et al., 2005), can reduce fatigue, both subjectively and objectively.
Metabolically, they increase the production of carbon dioxide. Increasing
sugar decreases the liberation and use of fatty acids, and by a variety of
mechanisms, helps to lower the production of ammonia, lactate, and
inflammatory cytokines. (Lactic acid, in combination with acidosis and free
phospholipids, can interfere with efficient cell functions [Pacini and Kane,
1991; Boachie-Ansah, et al., 1992].) Free fatty acids release tryptophan from
albumin, contributing to the formation of serotonin, which increases the sense
of fatigue.  
  
Aspirin and niacin help to prevent fatigue symptoms, and to prevent many of
the harmful systemic oxidative after-effects. (Both are antilipolytic; aspirin
uncouples mitochondria.)  
  
Uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism from ATP production helps to
consume the sugar which otherwise would be diverted into lactic acid, and
converts it into carbon dioxide instead. Mild hypoxia, as at high altitude,
suppresses lactic acid production ("the lactate paradox"), and increases the
amount of carbon dioxide in tissues.  
  
Aspirin and thyroid (T3) increase uncoupling. A drug that used to be used for
weight reduction, DNP, also uncouples mitochondrial metabolism, and,
surprisingly, it has some of the beneficial effects of thyroid and aspirin. It
stimulates the consumption of lactic acid and the formation of carbon dioxide.  
  
The squirrel monkey, which on average weighs about 2 or 3 pounds as an adult,
lives much longer than other mammals of its size, usually about 20 years, as
long as 27. It has an extremely high rate of oxygen consumption. This is
probably the result of natural uncoupling of the mitochondria, similar to that
seen in long-lived mice. Mice with 17% higher resting oxygen consumption lived
36% longer than slow respiring mice of a related strain (Speakman, et al.,
2004).  
  
Living at a high altitude, people tend to eat more and stay leaner than when
they live near sea level. Apparently, their mitochondria are relatively
uncoupled, and they have more mitochondria, which would partly account for
their lower production of lactic acid during muscular exertion. Increased
thyroid activity, too, tends to increase mitochondrial mass, as well as their
uncoupling.  
  
Most of the things that we think of as fatigue result from disturbances of the
hydration of cells, whose sensitivity, composition, and structure change
according to the extent of the disturbance. The hydration is governed by the
cells' "electrical" properties, which are regulated by internal metabolic
processes and by systemic processes. When cellular fatigue reaches a certain
point, only the interactions of all the organs can restore stable cellular
structure and functions. The liver eliminates lactic acid and ammonia, the
adrenals and gonads provide stabilizing steroids, and the brain alters
activity and behavior, in ways that can reverse most of the effects of
fatigue.  
  
But, when the tissues contain large amounts of polyunsaturated fats, every
episode of fatigue and prolonged excitation leaves a residue of oxidative
damage, and the adaptive mechanisms become progressively less effective. When
the most powerful adaptive mechanisms, such as the timely synthesis of
progesterone, pregnenolone, DHEA, T3, and the inhibitory transmitters, GABA
and glycine, fail, then some of the primitive defense mechanisms will become
chronically activated, and even sleep may fail to restore normal cellular
water and metabolism. Hyperventilation often becomes a problem, making
capillary leakiness worse.  
  
Water in the body occupies three major compartments--blood vessels,
extracellular matrix, and the moist cell substance itself--and its condition
in each compartment is a little different, and subject to variation. There are
no textbooks in use in the U.S. that treat intracellular water scientifically,
and the result is that physicians are confused when they see patients with
edema or with disturbances in blood volume. It rarely occurs to physicians to
consider disturbances of water distribution in problems such as chronic
fatigue, fibromyalgia, sleep disturbances, frequent urination, slow bladder
emptying, anxiety, paresthesia, movement disorders, the tunnel syndromes, or
even slowed thinking, but "intracellular fatigue" leading to over-hydration is
probably the central problem in these, and many other degenerative and
inflammatory problems.  
  
The improvements in cell functions and water distribution that are inversely
related to oxygen pressure, and directly related to carbon dioxide, won't be
discussed in medical textbooks until they have given up the idea of membrane-
regulated cells.  
  
The "treatment" for intracellular fatigue consists of normalizing thyroid and
steroid metabolism, and eating a diet including fruit juice, milk, some eggs
or liver, and gelatin, assuring adequate calcium, potassium sodium, and
magnesium, and using supplements of niacin-amide, aspirin, and carbon dioxide
when necessary. Simply increasing carbon dioxide decreases lactic acid and
ammonia, increases GABA (the sleep improving nerve inhibitor), and regulates
mineral and water disposition.  
  
One of the outcomes of the study of the physiology of fatigue is that it leads
to a better understanding of cells in general, and offers some new insights
into aging, inflammation, and a variety of stress-related diseases.  
  
REFERENCES  
Minerva Med. 1966 Feb 21;57(15):599-604. [Chronic hyposystole in the senile
heart][Article in Italian] Angelino PF, Gallo C, Vacca G.  
Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunol Scand [A]. 1982 Nov;90(6):441-8. Morphology of
rat prostatic lobes and seminal vesicles after long-term estrogen treatment.
Andersson H, Tisell LE. "The growth of the prostatic lobes and seminal
vesicles of castrated rats was studied morphologically after long-term
treatment with estradiol benzoate. Estradiol promoted slightly the growth of
the prostatic lobes but more markedly the seminal vesicles, although it had
catabolic effects as reflected in low body and levator ani weights."  
Int J Sports Med. 1990 May;11 Suppl 2:S129-42. Exercise-induced
hyperammonemia: peripheral and central effects. Banister EW, Cameron BJ.
"Depending on the intensity and duration of exercise, muscle ammonia may be
elevated to the extent that it leaks (diffuses) from muscle to blood, and
thereby can be carried to other organs." "It seems reasonable to assume that
exhaustive exercise may induce a state of acute ammonia toxicity which,
although transient and reversible relative to disease states, may be severe
enough in critical regions of the CNS to affect continuing coordinated
activity." "There have been numerous suggestions that elevated ammonia is
associated with, or perhaps is responsible for, exercise fatigue...." "Since
more is known about elevated brain ammonia during other diverse conditions
such as disease states, chemically induced convulsion, and hyperbaric
hyperoxia, some of these relevant data are discussed."  
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1992 Oct;20(4):538-46. Effects of a combination of
acidosis, lactate, and lysophosphatidylcholine on action potentials and ionic
currents in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. Boachie-Ansah G, Kane KA, Rankin
AC.  
Pharmacology. 2004 Oct;72(2):121-7. Relaxant effects of estradiol through non-
genomic pathways in male and female pig bladder smooth muscle. Dambros M, van
Koeveringe GA, Bast A, van Kerrebroeck PE.  
Int J Neurosci. 2005 May;115(5):613-23. Correlations between nonverbal
intelligence and nerve conduction velocities in right-handed male and female
subjects. Budak F, Filiz TM, Topsever P, Tan U.  
Aviat Space Environ Med. 1987 Jan;58(1):39-46. Respiratory response and muscle
function during isometric handgrip exercise at high altitude. Burse RL,
Cymerman A, Young AJ. "Exercise consisted of four successive endurance
handgrips held to complete fatigue at 40% of maximum isometric handgrip
strength (MHS)." "MHS was significantly increased at altitude--by 11% on day 2
and 16% on day 6."  
J Appl Physiol. 1986 Aug;61(2):402-8. Lactate efflux is unrelated to
intracellular PO2 in a working red muscle in situ. Connett RJ, Gayeski TE,
Honig CR.  
Pharmacology. 2004 Oct;72(2):121-7. Relaxant effects of estradiol through non-
genomic pathways in male and female pig bladder smooth muscle. Dambros M, van
Koeveringe GA, Bast A, van Kerrebroeck PE.  
Ann Ital Med Int. 1999 Jul-Sep;14(3):196-201. [Hyperammonemia during
hypothyroidism: an unusual biohumoral finding normalized by hormonal
replacement treatment] De Nardo D, Franconi G, Sabino D.  
PhysRevLett.93.228104 Dielectric Modulation of Biological Water, Despa F,
Fernández A, Berry RS. "We show that water constrained by vicinal hydrophobes
undergoes a librational dynamics that lowers the dielectric susceptibility and
induces a ‘‘redshift’’ of the relaxation frequency in the hydration shell."  
Fertil Steril. 1975 Feb;26(2):101-10. Influence of estrogen and progesterone
treatment on ovarian contractility in the monkey. Diaz-Infante A Jr, Wright
KH, Wallach EE.  
Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2005 Jun 9;34:173-199. Modeling water, the
hydrophobic effect, and ion solvation. Dill KA, Truskett TM, Vlachy V, Hribar-
Lee B.  
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001 Oct 15;164(8 Pt 1):1476-80. Effects of chronic
hypoxemia on the afferent nerve activities from skeletal muscle. Dousset E,
Decherchi P, Grelot L, Jammes Y. "The conduction velocity of all nerve fibers
was significantly (p < 0.01) higher in hypoxemic rats than in the normoxemic
group."  
Ann N Y Acad Sci. Mar 30;204:100-12 1973. Phase transitions in biological
systems: manifestations of cooperative processes in vicinal water. Drost-
Hansen W.  
Symp Soc Exp Biol. 1972;26:61-101. Effects of pressure on the structure of
water in various aqueous systems. Drost-Hansen W.  
Cell. Mol. Biol. 47 (2001) 865-883. Temperature effects on cell-functioning -
A critical role for vicinal water, Drost-Hansen W.  
Shock. 1998 May;9(5):375-83. Resuscitation with hypertonic saline dextran
improves cardiac function in vivo and ex vivo after burn injury in sheep.
Elgjo GI, Mathew BP, Poli de Figueriedo LF, Schenarts PJ, Horton JW, Dubick
MA, Kramer GC.  
Clin Physiol. 1985 Aug;5(4):325-36. Ammonia metabolism during exercise in man.
Eriksson LS, Broberg S, Bjorkman O, Wahren J. "Physical exercise is
accompanied by increased plasma levels of ammonia...."  
Croatica Chemica Acta, 56 (1983) 563-592. Recent thermodynamic data on vicinal
water and a model for their interpretation, Etzler FM and Drost-Hansen W.  
Int J Sport Nutr. 1993 Jun;3(2):150-64. Carbohydrate intake and recovery from
prolonged exercise. Fallowfield JL, Williams C.  
Scanning Microsc. 1988 Mar;2(1):267-73. Ion and water retention by
permeabilized cells. Hazlewood CF, Kellermayer M.  
Res Vet Sci. 1984 Sep;37(2):138-40. Genesis of oestrogenic inhibition of
soleus muscle development in female mice. Ihemelandu EC. The mechanism by
which oestrogen inhibits development of muscle mass was investigated in the
soleus muscle of 20 sexually immature female mice.  
Med Sci Sports Exerc 1983;15(6):514-9. Effects of hypercapnia and hyperoxia on
metabolism during exercise. Graham TE, Wilson BA "Five subjects performed 30
min of steady-state exercise (65% VO2max) on eight occasions while inspiring
either 21 or 60% O2 in combination with 0, 2, 4, or 6% CO2. Statistical
significance was accepted if P less than 0.05. The four HO tests were
associated with increased VO2 and lower R and blood lactate. However, when
compared to the four normoxic tests, all of the hypercapnic (HC) conditions
(independent of the inspired O2 percent) had statistically lower blood
lactate."  
Adv Exp Med Biol. 1994;368:181-95. Exercise-induced hyperammonemia: skeletal
muscle ammonia metabolism and the peripheral and central effects. Graham TE.
University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.  
J Inherit Metab Dis. 1994;17(5):566-74. Menstrual cycle and gonadal steroid
effects on symptomatic hyperammonaemia of urea-cycle-based and idiopathic
aetiologies. Grody WW, Chang RJ, Panagiotis NM, Matz D, Cederbaum SD. "We
report two female patients, one with a known inborn error of ureagenesis and
the other of unknown cause, in whom recurrent, transient episodes of severe
hyperammonaemia increased in frequency and severity with sexual maturity and
parturition." "These studies suggest a new therapeutic approach to defective
ureagenesis in female patients and a relationship between ammonia production
or disposal and the menstrual cycle."  
Intern Med. 1993 Aug;32(8):655-8. Portal-systemic encephalopathy and
hypothalamic hypothyroidism: effect of thyroid hormone on ammonia metabolism.
Hitoshi S, Terao Y, Sakuta M.  
Am Surg. 1994 Jul;60(7):505-7; discussion 508. Hypertonic saline/dextran
improves septic myocardial performance. Ing RD, Nazeeri MN, Zeldes S,
Dulchavsky SA, Diebel LN.  
Jpn J Physiol. 2000 Feb;50(1):167-9. Increase in O(2) delivery with hyperoxia
does not increase O(2) uptake in tetanically contracting dog muscle. Kohzuki
H, Sakata S, Ohga Y, Misawa H, Kishi T, Takaki M. We investigated the
influence of hyperoxia on O(2) uptake in tetanically contracting canine
gastrocnemius. Hyperoxia showed neither increase in O(2) uptake nor decrease
in lactate release, irrespective of increased O(2) supply, venous Po(2) and
vascular resistance, as compared to normoxia, suggesting that hyperoxia
decreases O(2) diffusion conductance and/or effective O(2) supply probably due
to arteriovenous O(2) diffusion shunt.  
Jpn J Physiol. 2000 Feb;50(1):167-9. Increase in O(2) delivery with hyperoxia
does not increase O(2) uptake in tetanically contracting dog muscle. Kohzuki
H, Sakata S, Ohga Y, Misawa H, Kishi T, Takaki M.  
Endokrinologie. 1982 Nov;80(3):294-8. The effect of androgen and estrogen on
food intake and body weight in rats--age dependency. Kuchar S, Mozes S, Boda
K, Koppel J. "The body weight of experimental animals on the 20th day was
significantly lower than in the control ones. The losses of the body weight
after the estrogen treatment rose with the age of the rats."  
Clin Investig. 1993 Dec;71(12):999-1001. Exercise-induced myalgia in
hypothyroidism. Lochmuller H, Reimers CD, Fischer P, Heuss D, Muller-Hocker J,
Pongratz DE.  
Pflugers Arch. 1995 Dec;431(2):253-8. Ca2+ entry and vasoconstriction during
osmotic swelling of vascular smooth muscle cells. Lang F, Busch GL, Zempel G,
Ditlevsen J, Hoch M, Emerich U, Axel D, Fingerle J, Meierkord S, Apfel H, et
al.  
Acta Physiol Scand. 2001 Mar;171(3):277-94. Skeletal muscle disorders in heart
failure. Lunde PK, Sjaastad I, Schiotz Thorud HM, Sejersted OM. "Heart failure
is associated with reduction of exercise capacity that cannot be solely
ascribed to reduced maximal oxygen uptake...." "Is it possible that
development of this contractile deficit in the myocardium is paralleled by a
corresponding contractile deficit of the skeletal muscles?" "This question
cannot be answered today. Both patient studies and experimental studies
support that there is a switch to a faster muscle phenotype and energy
metabolism balance is more anaerobic."  
Circ Res. 2001 Jun 22;88(12):1299-305. Contraction and intracellular Ca(2+)
handling in isolated skeletal muscle of rats with congestive heart failure.
Lunde PK, Dahlstedt AJ, Bruton JD, Lannergren J, Thoren P, Sejersted OM,
Westerblad H. "In conclusion, functional impairments can be observed in limb
muscle isolated from rats with CHF."  
J Physiol. 2002 Apr 15;540(Pt 2):571-80. Contractile properties of in situ
perfused skeletal muscles from rats with congestive heart failure. Lunde PK,
Verburg E, Eriksen M, Sejersted OM. "We hypothesized that in congestive heart
failure (CHF) slow-twitch but not fast-twitch muscles exhibit decreased
fatigue resistance in the sense of accelerated reduction of muscle force
during activity." "Initial force was almost the same in Sol from CHF and Sham
rats, but relaxation was slower in CHF. Relaxation times (95-5 % of peak
force) were 177 +/- 55 and 131 +/- 44 ms in CHF and Sham, respectively,
following the first stimulation train. After 2 min of stimulation the muscles
transiently became slower and maximum relaxation times were 264 +/- 71 and 220
+/- 45 ms in CHF and Sham, respectively (P < 0.05)." "Thus, slow-twitch muscle
is severely affected in CHF by slower than normal relaxation and significantly
reduced fatigue resistance, which may explain the sensation of both muscle
stiffness and fatigue in CHF patients."  
Pflugers Arch. 1995 Dec;431(2):253-8. Ca2+ entry and vasoconstriction during
osmotic swelling of vascular smooth muscle cells. Lang F, Busch GL, Zempel G,
Ditlevsen J, Hoch M, Emerich U, Axel D, Fingerle J, Meierkord S, Apfel H, et
al. "Exposure of aortic strips from guinea-pigs to hypotonic extracellular
fluid is followed by marked vasoconstriction...."  
Ukr Biokhim Zh. 1978 Sep-Oct;50(5):635-40. [Effect of carbonic acid of
different concentrations of the glycolysis processes and tricarboxylic acid
cycle in rat liver tissues] [Article in Russian] Lutsenko NI, Mel'nichuk DA,
Zhuravskii NI. "A rise in the carbonic acid and pH level in rat blood
determines an increase in oxidative properties of the liver cell cytoplasm."
"The increase in the level of carbonic acid under the all studied values of pH
produces a 1.5-fold decrease in the ammonia concentration."  
Langmuir 1996, 12, 2045-2051. Charging of Oil-Water Interfaces Due to
Spontaneous Adsorption of Hydroxyl Ions, Marinova KG, Alargova RG, Denkov ND,
Velev OD, Petsev DN, Ivanov IB, and Borwankar RP.  
Kosm Biol Aviakosm Med. 1983 Nov-Dec;17(6):46-9. [Metabolic disorders in men
kept in an environment with a low ammonia content and their correction by
physical exercise] [Article in Russian] Mukhamedieva LN, Zhuravlev VV, Nikitin
EI, Grishina KV, Ivanova SM. "In two series of prolonged studies metabolic
changes of men kept in an environment with an ammonia concentration of 2 and 5
mg/m3 were investigated. In this chronic study the following changes were
seen: acetone in the exhaled air increased; glycolysis and lactate
dehydrogenase enhanced; catalase decreased; changes of acid-base equilibrium
manifested as metabolic acidosis of varying degree."  
Jpn J Physiol. 1984;34(5):803-13. Mechanism of inotropic action by hypotonic
solution in the frog atrial muscle. Ohba M, Kishi M, Kawata H.  
J Bacteriol. 1960 Jul;80:21-4. A relationship between multiple temperature
optima for biological systems and the properties of water. Oppenheimer CH,
Drost-Hansen W.  
Shock. 2003 Apr;19(4):383-7. Hypertonic saline dextran alleviates hepatic
injury in hypovolemic rats undergoing porta hepatis occlusion. Ozguc H, Tokyay
R, Kahveci N, Serdar Z, Gur ES.  
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1991 Aug;18(2):261-6. Effects of components of
myocardial ischaemia on cardiac action potentials in vitro. Pacini DJ, Kane
KA.  
Science. 2004 Aug 20;305(5687):1144-7. Intracellular acidosis enhances the
excitability of working muscle. Pedersen TH, Nielsen OB, Lamb GD, Stephenson
DG.  
Biophys J. 1998 Dec;75(6):2984-95. Volume changes of the myosin lattice
resulting from repetitive stimulation of single muscle fibers. Rapp G, Ashley
CC, Bagni MA, Griffiths PJ, Cecchi G.  
Neuropsychologia. 2004;42(12):1709-14. Sex difference in brain nerve
conduction velocity in normal humans. Reed TE, Vernon PA, Johnson AM.  
Bull Eur Physiopathol Respir. 1976. Jan-Feb;12(1):19-32. [CO2 storage in
various organs during chronic experimental hypercapnia] Reichart E, Claudon F,
Sabliere S. "During a four week hypercapnia, this CO2 increase is very
important in bone and brain compared with that of other organs and of the
whole body. With regard to the whole body, the bone CO2 content is still
increasing after four weeks." "A factorial analysis (BENZECRI) shows that the
weight of H2Oe in the information diminishes for all organs, both with the
duration of normal subjects observation (ageing) and with the hypercapnia
duration."  
Life Sci. 1993;52(18):1481-6. Hypertonic glucose inhibits the production of
oxygen-derived free radicals by rat neutrophils. Sato N, Kashima K, Shimizu H,
Uehara Y, Shimomura Y, Mori M.  
Exp Physiol. 1997 Jan;82(1):213-26. Dissociation between metabolic and
contractile responses during intermittent isometric exercise in man. Saugen E,
Vollestad NK, Gibson H, Martin PA, Edwards RH.  
J Biol Chem. 1990 Jul 5;265(19):1118-24. Respiratory failure and stimulation
of glycolysis in Chinese hamster ovary cells exposed to normobaric hyperoxia.
Schoonen WG, Wanamarta AH, van der Klei-van Moorsel JM, Jakobs C, Joenje H.  
Monatsh. Chem. 132 (2001) 1295-1326. Recent advances in the description of the
structure of water, the hydrophobic effect, and the like-dissolves-like rule,
Schmid, R.  
Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1994;69(4):350-4. Hyperammonaemia in
relation to high-intensity exercise duration in man. Sewell DA, Gleeson M,
Blannin AK.  
Toxicology. 1981;22(2):133-47. Relative effects of hyperbaric oxygen on
cations and catecholamine metabolism in rats: protection by lithium against
seizures. Singh AK, Banister EW. "Lithium itself affects neurological actions
but the mechanisms remain obscure. It also modifies the toxic action of oxygen
at high pressure (OHP), which causes convulsions, either suppressing or
exacerbating it." "...OHP developed a sustained blood and brain hyperammonemia
in rats which could be negatively modified by Li+ in the blood."  
Br J Pharmacol. 1996 Sep;119(1):43-8. Investigation of the negative inotropic
effects of 17 beta-oestradiol in human isolated myocardial tissues. Sitzler G,
Lenz O, Kilter H, La Rosee K, Bohm M.  
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1984 Jan 7;304(1118):69-84. The
interactions between pressure and anaesthetics. Smith RA, Dodson BA, Miller
KW. Compression of animals causes excitation, which has recently posed a
barrier to deeper diving.  
Lab Anim Sci. 1977 Oct;27(5 Pt 1):655-9. Oxygen consumption and thyroid
function in the squirrel monkey (Saimiri sciureus). Smoake JA, Mulvey PF Jr,
Gerben M, Jones LG. [hypermetabolic]  
Aging Cell. 2004 Jun;3(3):87-95. Uncoupled and surviving: individual mice with
high metabolism have greater mitochondrial uncoupling and live longer.
Speakman JR, Talbot DA, Selman C, Snart S, McLaren JS, Redman P, Krol E,
Jackson DM, Johnson MS, Brand MD. "We found a positive association between
metabolic intensity (kJ daily food assimilation expressed as g/body mass) and
lifespan, but no relationships of lifespan to body mass, fat mass or lean body
mass."  
J Appl Physiol. 1990 Nov;69(5):1651-6. Enhanced leg exercise endurance with a
high-carbohydrate diet and dihydroxyacetone and pyruvate. Stanko RT, Robertson
RJ, Galbreath RW, Reilly JJ Jr, Greenawalt KD, Goss FL.  
Rev Can Biol. 1959 Apr;18(1):23-52. Studies on the mechanism of the catabolic
action of estrogens. Sternberg J, Pascoe-Dawson E.  
Jpn J Physiol. 1993;43 Suppl 1:S67-75. The origin of rapid changes in
birefringence, light scattering and dye absorbance associated with excitation
of nerve fibers. Tasaki I, Byrne PM. "Based on the finding that the time-
course of the birefringence change accurately coincides with that of swelling
of the nerve, optical changes are interpreted as being brought about by
invasion of water into the superficial layer of the nerve fibers. A close
relationship has also been demonstrated between nerve swelling and changes in
light scattering and in dye absorbance."  
Postgrad Med J. 2000 Jul;76(897):424-6. Primary hypothyroidism masquerading as
hepatic encephalopathy: case report and review of the literature. Thobe N,
Pilger P, Jones MP. A 74 year old woman with hepatitis C of long duration was
admitted to hospital in hyperammonaemic coma. Despite aggressive treatment of
hepatic encephalopathy, there was no clinical improvement. As part of her
evaluation for other causes of altered mental status, she was found to be
profoundly hypothyroid. Treatment with thyroid replacement hormone was
accompanied by prompt normalisation of her mental status and hyperammonaemia.
Hypothyroidism may exacerbate hyperammonaemia and portosystemic encephalopathy
in patients with otherwise well compensated liver disease. Hyopthyroidism
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of encephalopathy in
patients with liver disease.  
J Trauma. 1992 Jun;32(6):704-12; discussion 712-3. Effects of hypertonic
saline dextran resuscitation on oxygen delivery, oxygen consumption, and lipid
peroxidation after burn injury. Tokyay R, Zeigler ST, Kramer GC, Rogers CS,
Heggers JP, Traber DL, Herndon DN.  
Eur J Pharmacol. 1999 Oct 15;382(3):177-85. Influence of increase in osmotic
pressure with sucrose on relaxation and cyclonucleotides levels in isolated
rat aorta. Tabrizchi R.  
J. Chem. Phys. 117 (2002) 5101-5104. Predicting water's phase diagram and
liquid-state anomalies, Truskett TM and K. A. Dill KA.  
J Appl Physiol. 1978 Mar;44(3):333-9. Selected brain amino acids and ammonium
during chronic hypercapnia in conscious rats. Weyne J, Van Leuven F, Kazemi H,
Leusen I. "Hypercapnia increased glutamine and GABA and decreased glutamic and
aspartic acids. Changes occurred within 1 h and were maintained during the
observation period of 3 wk." "The changes observed may have a role in
metabolic pH homeostasis of brain tissue and may also be relevant to the
modified brain excitability in hypercapnia."  
J Appl Physiol. 2005 Apr 14; Caffeine increases exogenous carbohydrate
oxidation during exercise. Yeo SE, Jentjens RL, Wallis GA, Jeukendrup AE.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2013. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

