![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Fats and degeneration**  

========================================

**50 years ago, in the first phase of marketing the polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA), linoleic acid was heart protective, and the saturated fats
raised cholesterol and caused heart disease.**

**In the second phase, the other essential fatty acid, linolenic acid, was
said to be even better than linoleic acid.**

**In the third phase, the longer chain omega -3 (omega minus three, or n minus
three) fatty acids, DHA and EPA, are said to be even better than linolenic
acid.**

**Along the way, the highly unsaturated arachidonic acid, which we and other
animals make out of the linoleic acid in foods, was coming to be identified
with the harmful animal fats. But we just didn't hear much about how the
amount of arachidonic acid in the tissues depended on the amount of linoleic
acid in the diet.**

**U.S. marketing dominates the world economy, including of course the
communication media, so we shouldn't expect to hear much about the role of
PUFA in causing cancer, diabetes, obesity, aging, thrombosis, arthritis and
immunodeficiency, or to hear about the benefits of the saturated fats.**

**The saturated fats include the tropical fats, because they are synthesized
in very warm organisms, and are very stable at those temperatures. Their
stability offers some protection against the unstable PUFA.**

**Several of the degenerative conditions produced by the essential fatty
acids can be reversed by use of saturated fats, varying in length from the
short chains of coconut oil to the very long chains of waxes.**  

=========================================  

When a person uses a drug, there is generally an awareness that the benefit
has to be weighed against the side effects. But if something is treated as a
nutrient, especially an essential nutrient, there is an implication that
it won't produce undesirable side effects.

Over the last thirty years I have asked several prominent oil researchers what
the evidence is that there is such a thing as an essential fatty acid. One
professor cited a single publication about a solitary sick person who
recovered from some sickness after being given some unsaturated fat. (If he
had known of any better evidence, wouldn't he have mentioned it?) The others
(if they answered at all) cited Burr and Burr, 1929. The surprising thing
about that answer is that these people can consider any nutritional research
from 1929 to be definitive. It's very much like quoting a 1929 opinion of a
physicist regarding the procedure for making a hydrogen bomb. What was known
about nutrition in 1929? Most of the B vitamins weren't even suspected, and it
had been only two or three years since vitamin B had been subdivided into
two factors, the antineuritic factor, B1, and the growth factor, B2. Burr
had no way of really understanding what deficiencies or toxicities were
present in his experimental diet.

A few years after the first experiments, Burr put one of his essential fatty
acid deficient rats under a bell jar to measure its metabolic rate, and found
that the deficient animals were metabolizing 50% faster than rats that were
given linoleic and linolenic acids as part of their diet. That was an
important observation, but Burr didn't understand its implications. Later,
many experiments showed that the polyunsaturated fats slowed metabolism by
profoundly interfering with the function of the thyroid hormone and the
cellular respiratory apparatus. Without the toxic fats, respiratory energy
metabolism was very intense, and a diet that was nutritionally sufficient for
a sluggish animal wouldn't necessarily be adequate for the vigorous animals.

Several publications between 1936 and 1944 made it very clear that Burr's
basic animal diet was deficient in various nutrients, especially vitamin B6.
**The disease that appeared in Burr's animals could be cured by fat free
B-vitamin preparations, or by purified vitamin B6 when it became available.**
**A zinc deficiency produces similar symptoms,** and at the time Burr did his
experiments, there was no information on the effects of fats on mineral
absorption. If a diet is barely adequate in the essential minerals, increasing
the metabolic rate, or decreasing intestinal absorption of minerals, will
produce mineral deficiencies and metabolic problems.

Although Burr's disease clearly turned out to be a B-vitamin deficiency,
probably combined with a mineral deficiency, it continues to be cited as the
basis justifying the multibillion dollar industry that has grown up around the
essential oils.

Two years before Burr's experiment, German researchers found that a fat-free
diet prevented almost all spontaneous cancers in rats. Later work showed that
the polyunsaturated fats both initiate and promote cancer. With that
knowledge, the people who kept claiming that linoleic, linolenic, and maybe
arachidonic acid are the essential fatty acids, should have devoted some
effort to finding out how much of that essential nutrient was enough, so
that people could minimize their consumption of the carcinogenic stuff.

Between the first and second world wars, cod liver oil was recommended as a
vitamin supplement, at first as a source of vitamin A, and later as a source
of vitamins A and D. But in the late 1940s, experimenters used it as the main
fat in dogs' diet, and found that they all died from cancer, while the dogs on
a standard diet had only a 5% cancer mortality. That sort of information, and
the availability of synthetic vitamins, led to the decreased use of cod liver
oil.

But around that time, the seed oil industry was in crisis because the use of
those oils in paints and plastics was being displaced by new compounds made
from petroleum. The industry needed new markets, and discovered ways to
convince the public that seed oils were better than animal fats. They were
called the heart protective oils, though human studies soon showed the same
results that the animal studies had, namely, that they were toxic to the heart
and increased the incidence of cancer.

The lipid hypothesis of heart disease argued that cholesterol in the blood
caused atherosclerosis, and that the polyunsaturated oils lowered the amount
of cholesterol in the blood. Leaving behind the concept of nutritional
essentiality, this allowed the industry (and their academic supporters, such
as Frederick Stare at Harvard) to begin promoting the oils as having drug-like
therapeutic properties. Larger amounts of polyunsaturated fat were supposed to
be more protective by lowering the cholesterol, and were to be substituted for
the saturated fats, which supposedly raised cholesterol and increased heart
disease, producing atherosclerotic plaques in the blood vessels and increasing
the formation of blood clots.

Since all ordinary foods contain significant amounts of the polyunsaturated
fats, there was no reason to think that, even if they were essential
nutrients, people were likely to become deficient in them. So the idea of
treating the seed oils as drug-like substances, to be taken in large amounts,
appealed to the food oil industry.

Prostaglandins, which are produced in the body by oxidizing the
polyunsaturated fatty acids, provided an opportunity for the drug industry to
get involved in a new market, and **the prostaglandins offered a new way of
arguing for the nutritional essentiality of linoleic and related acids: A
whole system of hormones is made from these molecules.** Since some of the
prostaglandins suppress immunity, cause inflammation and promote cancer
growth, some people have divided them into the good prostaglandins and the
bad prostaglandins.

PGI2, or prostacyclin, is considered to be a good prostaglandin, because it
causes vasodilatation, and so drug companies have made their own synthetic
equivalents: Epoprostenol, iloprost, taprostene, ciprostene, UT-15, beraprost,
and cicaprost. Some of these are being investigated for possible use in
killing cancer.

But many very useful drugs that already existed, including cortisol and
aspirin, were found to achieve some of their most important effects by
inhibiting the formation of the prostaglandins. It was the body's load of
polyunsaturated fats which made it very susceptible to inflammation, stress,
trauma, infection, radiation, hormone imbalance, and other fundamental
problems, and drugs like aspirin and cortisone, which limit the activation of
the stored essential fatty acids, gain their remarkable range of beneficial
effects partly by the restraint they impose on those stored toxins.

Increasingly, the liberation of arachidonic acid from tissues during stress is
seen as a central factor in all forms of stress, either acute (as in burns or
exercise) or chronic (as in diabetes or aging). And, as the fat stores become
more toxic, it seems that they more readily liberate the free fatty acids.
(For example, see Iritani, et al., 1984)

During this same period, a few experimenters were finding that animals which
were fed a diet lacking the essential fatty acids had some remarkable
properties **:** They consumed oxygen and calories at a very high rate, their
mitochondria were unusually tough and stable, their tissues could be
transplanted into other animals without provoking immunological rejection, and
they were very hard to kill by trauma and a wide variety of toxins that easily
provoke lethal shock in animals on the usual diet. As the Germans had seen in
1927, they had a low susceptibility to cancer, and new studies were showing
that they weren't susceptible to various fibrotic conditions, including
alcoholic liver cirrhosis.

In 1967 a major nutrition publication, _Present Knowledge in Nutrition,_
published Hartroft and Porta's observation that the age pigment, lipofuscin,
was formed in proportion to the amount of polyunsaturated fat and oxidants in
the diet. The new interest in organ transplantation led to the discovery that
the polyunsaturated fats prolonged graft survival, by suppressing the immune
system. Immunosuppression was considered to have a role in the carcinogenicity
of the essential fatty acids.

Around the same time, there were studies that showed that unsaturated fats
retarded brain development and produced obesity.

Substances very much like the prostaglandins, called isoprostanes and
neuroprostanes, are formed spontaneously from highly unsaturated fatty acids,
and are useful as indicators of the rate of lipid peroxidation in the body.
Most of the products of lipid peroxidation are toxic, as a result of their
reactions with proteins, DNA, and the mitochondria. The age-related glycation
products that are usually blamed on sugar, are largely the result of
peroxidation of the polyunsaturated fatty acids.

Through the 1970s, this sort of information about the harmful effects of the
PUFA was being slowly assimilated by the culture, though many dietitians still
spoke of the essential fatty acids, vitamin F. By 1980, it looked as though
responsible researchers would see the promotion of cancer, heart disease,
mitochondrial damage, hypothyroidism and immunosuppression caused by the
polyunsaturated fats as their most important feature, and would see that there
had never been a basis for believing that they were essential nutrients.

But then, without acknowledging that there had been a problem with the
doctrine of essentiality, fat researchers just started changing the subject,
shifting the public discourse to safer, more profitable topics. The fats that
had been called essential, but that had so many toxic effects, were no longer
emphasized, and the failed idea of essentiality was shifted to different
categories of polyunsaturated fats.

The addition of the long chain highly unsaturated fats to baby food formulas
was recently approved, on the basis of their supposed essentiality for brain
development. One of the newer arguments for the essentiality of the PUFA is
that they are needed for making cell membranes. But human cells can grow and
divide in artificial culture solutions which contain none of the
polyunsaturated fats, and no one has claimed that they are growing without
membranes.

The long chain fats found in fish and some algae don't interfere with animal
enzymes as strongly as the seed oils do, and so by comparison, they aren't so
harmful. They are also so unstable that relatively little of them is stored in
the tissues. (And when they are used as food additives, it's necessary to use
antioxidants to keep them from becoming smelly and acutely toxic.)

When meat is grilled at a high temperature, the normally spaced double bonds
in PUFA migrate towards each other, becoming more stable, so that linoleic
acid is turned into conjugated linoleic acid. This analog of the essential
linoleic acid competes against the linoleic acid in tissues, and protects
against cancer, atherosclerosis, inflammation and other effects of the normal
PUFA. Presumably, anything which interferes with the essential fatty acids is
protective, when the organism contains dangerous amounts of PUFA. Even the
trans-isomers of the unsaturated fatty acids (found in butterfat, and
convertible into conjugated linoleic acid) can be protective against cancer.

In the 1980s the oil promoters were becoming more sophisticated, and were
publishing many experiments in which the fish oils were compared with corn
oil, or safflower, or soy oil, and in many of those experiments, the animals'
health was better when they didn't eat the very toxic seed oils, that
contained the essential fatty acids, linoleic and linoleic acids.

Besides comparing the fish oils to the stronger toxins, another trick is to
take advantage of the same immunosuppressive property that had seemed
troublesome, and to emphasize their ability to temporarily alleviate some
autoimmune or allergic diseases. X-rays were once used that way, to treat
arthritis and ringworm, for example.

And, knowing that cancer cells have the ability to consume large amounts of
fatty acids, they would test these fats in tissue culture dishes, and
demonstrate that they were poisonous, cytotoxic, to the fast growing cancer
cells. Although they caused cancer in animals, if they could be shown to kill
cancer cells in a dish, they could be sold as anticancer drugs/nutrients, with
the special mystique of being essential fatty acids. Strangely, their
ability to kill cancer cells under some circumstances and to suppress some
immunological reactions is being promoted in close association with the
doctrine that these fats are nutritionally essential.

Arachidonic acid is made from linoleic acid, and so those two oils were
considered as roughly equivalent in their ability to meet our nutritional
needs, but a large part of current research is devoted to showing the details
of how fish oils protect against arachidonic acid. The balance between the
omega -3 and the omega -6 fatty acids is increasingly being presented as a
defense against the toxic omega -6 fats. But the accumulation of unsaturated
fats with aging makes any defense increasingly difficult, and the extreme
instability of the highly unsaturated omega -3 fats creates additional
problems.

PUFA and x-rays have many biological effects in common. They are
immunosuppressive, but they produce their own inflammatory reactions, starting
with increased permeability of capillaries, disturbed coagulation and
proteolysis, and producing fibrosis and tumefaction or tissue atrophy. This
isn't just a coincidence, since ionizing radiation attacks the highly unstable
polyunsaturated molecules, simply accelerating processes that ordinarily
happen more slowly as a result of stress and aging.

Prolonged stress eventually tends to be a self-sustaining process, impairing
the efficient respiratory production of energy, converting muscle tissue to
amino acids, suppressing the thyroid, and activating further mobilization of
fatty acids. Fatty acids are mobilized from within the structure of cells by
phospholipases, and from fat tissues by other lipases.

The highly unsaturated fatty acids, as well as the ordinary essential fatty
acids, act directly to increase capillary permeability, even without
conversion into prostaglandins, and they interfere in many ways with the
clotting and clot removal systems. The effects of PUFA taken in a meal
probably disturb the clotting system more than the same quantity of saturated
fat, contrary to many of the older publications. The PUFA are widely believed
to prevent clotting, but when cod liver oil is given to EFA deficient
animals, it activates the formation of clots (Hornstra, et al., 1989). An
opposite effect is seen when a long chain fatty acid synergizes with aspirin,
to restrain clotting (Molina, et al., 2003).

Fibrosis is a generalized consequence of the abnormal capillary permeability
produced by things that disrupt the clotting system. Estrogen, with its known
contribution to the formation of blood clots and edema and fibrosis and
tumors, achieves part of its effect by maintaining a chronically high level of
free fatty acids, preferentially liberating arachidonic acid, rather than
saturated fatty acids.

Butter, beef fat, and lamb fat are the only mostly saturated fats produced on
a large scale in the U.S., and the cheapness/profitability of the seed oils
made it easy to displace them. But, in the face of the immense amount of
propagandistic health claims that have been made against the saturated fats,
it's instructive to look at some of their actual effects, especially on the
clotting system, and the related fibrotic reactions.

The saturated fatty acids are very unreactive chemically. Coconut oil, despite
containing about 1% of the unstable PUFA, can be left in a bucket at room
temperature for a year or more without showing any evidence of deterioration,
suggesting that the predominance of saturated fat acts as an antioxidant for
the unsaturated molecules. In the body, the saturated fats seem to act the
same way, preventing or even reversing many of the conditions caused by
oxidation of fats.

The stress-induced liberation of arachidonic acid causes blood vessels to
leak, and this allows fibrin to escape from the blood stream, into the
basement membrane and beyond into the extracellular matrix, where it produces
fibrosis. (Cancer, autoimmune diseases, and heart disease involve the same
inflammatory, thrombotic, fibrotic processes as the nominal fibroses.)
Scleroderma, liver cirrhosis, fibrosis of the lungs, heart, and other organs,
and all the diseases in which fibrous tissue becomes dense and progressively
contracts, involve similar processes, and the treatments which are successful
are those that stop the inflammation produced by the oxidation of the
polyunsaturated fatty acids.

Retroperitoneal fibrosis is now known to be produced by estrogen, and is
treated by antiestrogenic and antiserotonergic drugs, but as early as 1940
Alejandro Lipschutz demonstrated that chronic exposure to very low doses of
estrogen produced fibromas in essentially every part of the body. Earlier,
Loeb had studied the action of large doses of estrogen, which produced
fibrosis of the uterus, as if it had accelerated aging. Following Lipschutz'
work, in which he demonstrated the antifibromatogenic actions of
pregnenolone and progesterone, several Argentine researchers showed that
progesterone prevented and cured abdominal adhesions and other fibrotic
conditions, including retroperitoneal fibrosis.

Since estrogen produces both leakiness of the capillaries and excessive
formation of fibrin, its effects will be seen first in the organs where it
concentrates, but eventually anywhere capillaries leak fibrin. Estrogen
activates the phospholipase which liberates arachidonic acid, and progesterone
inhibits that phospholipase.

As the fat tissues become more burdened with arachidonic acid, they release it
more easily in response to moderately lipolytic stress signals. This could
explain the increased levels of free fatty acids and lipid peroxidation that
occur with aging. In animals that are deficient in the polyunsaturated fatty
acids, adrenalin doesn't have the lipolytic effect that it does in animals on
the standard diet. With aging, there is not only a tendency to have
chronically higher free fatty acids in the blood, but for those fatty acids to
be more unsaturated. The phospholipids of mitochondria and microsomes become
more unsaturated with aging (Laganiere and Yu, 1993, Lee, et al., 1999). In
the human retina there is a similar accumulation of PUFA with aging (Nourooz-
Zadeh and Pereira, 1999), which implies that the aged retina will be more
easily damaged by light.

Several studies suggest that a high degree of unsaturation in the fats is
fundamentally related to the aging process, since long lived species have a
lower degree of unsaturation in their fats. Caloric restriction decreases the
age-related accumulation of the fatty acids with 4 and 5 double bonds.

Although publicity has emphasized the anti-inflammatory effects of fish oil,
experiments show that it is extremely effective in producing alcohol-related
liver cirrhosis. Breakdown products of polyunsaturated fats (isoprostanes and
4-HNE) are found in the blood of people with alcoholic liver disease (Aleynik,
et al., 1998). In the absence of polyunsaturated fats, alcohol doesn't produce
cirrhosis. Saturated fats allow the fibrosis to regress **:**

**A diet enriched in saturated fatty acids effectively reverses alcohol-
induced necrosis, inflammation, and fibrosis despite continued alcohol
consumption. The therapeutic effects of saturated fatty acids may be
explained, at least in part, by reduced endotoxemia and lipid
peroxidation.... (Nanji, et al., 1995, 2001)**

In these studies, the animals were switched from fish oil to either palm oil
or medium chain triglycerides (a major fraction of coconut oil). In other
studies, Knittel, et al. (1995), show that fibrinogen, in a clotting-like
process, is involved in the development of liver fibrosis, and that this
appears to provide a basis for the growth of additional extracellular matrix.

Brown, et al. (1989), discussed this developmental process (leaky capillaries,
fibrosis) in relation to wound healing, lung disease, and tumor growth.

The relatively few studies of fish oil and linoleic acid that compare them
with palmitic acid or coconut oil have produced some very important results.
For example, pigs exposed to endotoxin developed severe lung problems
(resembling shock lung) when they had been on a diet with either fish oil or
Intralipid (which is mostly linoleic acid, used for intravenous feeding in
hospitals), but not after palmitic acid (Wolfe, et al., 2002).

Eating low-fat seafood (sole, whitefish, turbot, scallops, oysters, lobster,
shrimp, squid, etc.) once in a while can provide useful trace minerals,
without much risk. However, fish from some parts of the ocean contain
industrial contaminants in the fat, and large fish such as tuna, swordfish,
Chilean sea bass and halibut contain toxic amounts of mercury in the muscles.
Chilean sea bass (Patagonian toothfish) is very high in fat, too.

About ten years ago I met a young man with a degenerative brain disease, and
was interested in the fact that he (working on a fishing boat) had been eating
almost a pound of salmon per day for several years. There is now enough
information regarding the neurotoxic effects of fish oil to justify avoidance
of the fatty fish.

Some of the current advertising is promoting fish oil to prevent cancer, so
it's important to remember that there are many studies showing that it
increases cancer.

The developmental and physiological significance of the type of fatty acid in
the diet has been established for a long time, but cultural stereotypes and
commercial interests are threatened by it, so it can't be discussed publicly.  

REFERENCES  

Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1998 Feb;22(1):192-6. **Increased circulating products of
lipid peroxidation in patients with alcoholic liver disease.** Aleynik SI, Leo
MA, Aleynik MK, Lieber CS  

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1976;275:28-46. **Metabolic influences in experimental
thrombosis.** Antoniades HN, Westmoreland N.  

Nutr Cancer. 2001;41(1-2):91-7. **Vaccenic acid feeding increases tissue
levels of conjugated linoleic acid and suppresses development of premalignant
lesions in rat mammary gland.** Banni S, Angioni E, Murru E, Carta G, Melis
MP, Bauman D, Dong Y, Ip C.  

Obstet Gynecol. 1987 Sep;70(3 Pt 2):502-4. **The treatment of retroperitoneal
fibromatosis with medroxyprogesterone acetate.** Barnhill D, Hoskins W, Burke
T, Weiser E, Heller P, Park R. Wide excision is the recommended primary
therapy for retroperitoneal fibromatosis. Radiation therapy and a variety of
medications have been used to treat patients with recurrent tumors, but the
response to these agents has not been uniform. The patient presented was
successfully treated with medroxyprogesterone acetate for recurrent
retroperitoneal fibromatosis that was refractory to multiple operative
resections and radiation therapy.  

Medicina (B Aires). 1978 Mar-Apr;38(2):215-6. **[Fibromatosis, relaxin and
progesterone]** [in Spanish] Barousse AP. [Letter]

Medicina (B Aires). 1985;45(2):159-63. **Progesterone as therapy for
retroperitoneal fibrosis.** Bilder CR, Barousse AP, Mazure PA.  

Adv Exp Med Biol. 1976;75:497-503. **Effect of ionizing radiation on liver
microcirculation and oxygenation.** Bicher HI, Dalrymple GV, Ashbrook D, Smith
R, Harris D.  

Lipids. 1981 May;16(5):323-7. **Iodination of docosahexaenoic acid by
lactoperoxidase and thyroid gland in vitro: formation of an lodolactone.**
Boeynaems JM, Watson JT, Oates JA, Hubbard WC. In the presence of iodide,
hydrogen peroxide and lactoperoxidase, docosahexaenoic acid (22:6 omega 3) was
converted into iodinated compounds.  

Am Rev Respir Dis 1989 Oct;140(4):1104-7. **Leaky vessels, fibrin deposition,
and fibrosis: a sequence of events common to solid tumors and to many other
types of disease.** Brown LF, Dvorak AM, Dvorak HF  

Medicina (B Aires). 1979 Sep-Oct;39(5):652-4. **[Effect of progesterone in the
treatment of a patient with idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis]** [in
Spanish] Casadei DH, Najun Zarazaga C, Leanza HJ, Schiappapietra JH.  

Biochem Mol Biol Int 1993 Jan;29(1):175-83. **Influence of antioxidant
vitamins on fatty acid inhibition of lymphocyte proliferation.** Calder PC,
Newsholme EA. Vitamin E (10 microM) increased human lymphocyte proliferation
by 35%. However, vitamin E did not prevent the inhibitory effects of fatty
acids upon lymphocyte proliferation. It is concluded that inhibition of
lymphocyte proliferation by fatty acids is not caused by their conversion to
peroxidised products.  

Clin Sci (Lond). 1992 Jun;82(6):695-700. **Polyunsaturated fatty acids
suppress human peripheral blood lymphocyte proliferation and interleukin-2
production.** Calder PC, Newsholme EA.  

J Neurochem 1980 Oct;35(4):1004-7. **Transient formation of superoxide
radicals in polyunsaturated fatty acid-induced brain swelling.** Chan PH,
Fishman RA  

Int J Cancer 2001 Mar 15;91(6):894-9. **Tumor invasiveness and liver
metastasis of colon cancer cells correlated with cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
expression and inhibited by a COX-2-selective inhibitor, etodolac.** Chen WS,
Wei SJ, Liu JM, Hsiao M, Kou-Lin J, Yang WK.  

Free Radic Biol Med. 1999 Jul;27(1-2):51-9. **Arachidonic acid interaction
with the mitochondrial electron transport chain promotes reactive oxygen
species generation.** Cocco T, Di Paola M, Papa S, Lorusso M.  

Clin Exp Metastasis 1997 Jul;15(4):410-7. **Influence of lipid diets on the
number of metastases and ganglioside content of H59 variant tumors.** Coulombe
J, Pelletier G, Tremblay P, Mercier G, Oth D.  

BJU Int. 2003 Jun;91(9):830-8. **Fibrin as an inducer of fibrosis in the
tunica albuginea of the rat: a new animal model of Peyronie's disease.**
Davila HH, Ferrini MG, Rajfer J, Gonzalez-Cadavid NF.  

Carcinogenesis 1994 Jul;15(7):1399-404. **Peroxidation of linoleic,
arachidonic and oleic acid in relation to the induction of oxidative DNA
damage and cytogenetic effects.** de Kok TM, ten Vaarwerk F, Zwingman I, van
Maanen JM, Kleinjans JC.  

Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Oct 14;277(1):128-33. **Arachidonic acid
causes cytochrome c release from heart mitochondria.** Di Paola M, Cocco T,
Lorusso M.  

J Physiol. 1998 Mar 1;507 ( Pt 2):541-7. **Arachidonic acid increases cerebral
microvascular permeability by free radicals in single pial microvessels of the
anaesthetized rat.** Easton AS, Fraser PA.  

Am J Physiol. 1992 May;262(5 Pt 1):E637-43. ATP depletion stimulates calcium-
dependent protein breakdown in chick skeletal Muscle. Fagan JM, Wajnberg EF,
Culbert L, Waxman L.

Cancer Res 1998 Aug 1;58(15):3312-9. **Dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids promote colon carcinoma metastasis in rat liver.** Griffini P, Fehres O,
Klieverik L, Vogels IM, Tigchelaar W, Smorenburg SM, Van Noorden CJ.  

J Indian Med Assoc 1997 Mar;95(3):67-9, 83. **Association of dietary ghee
intake with coronary heart disease and risk factor prevalence in rural
males.** Gupta R, Prakash H  

Transplantation 1995 Sep 27;60(6):570-7. **The effect of dietary
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) on acute rejection and cardiac allograft
blood flow in rats.** Haw MP, Linnebjerg H, Chavali SR, Forse RA. The
immunosuppressive effect of dietary PUFA warrants further investigation, and
their use as a possible adjunctive treatment in organ transplantation should
be considered.  

Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2003 Jun 20;128(25-26):1395-8. **[Rare cause of chronic
abdominal pain: retractile mesenteritis]** [in German] Hermann F, Speich R,
Schneemann M. Retractile mesenteritis is a rare cause of chronic abdominal
pain with variable symptoms. Its aetiology is unknown. In case of bowel
ischemia a surgical approach is preferred, milder forms may be treated with
immunosuppressive agents as well as oral progesterone. Progesterone has
exhibited positive effects on fatty tissue with successful treatment in
desmoid tumors and retroperitoneal fibrosis. Here in we could demonstrate its
safe and efficient use in a patient with retractile mesenteritis.  

Mech Ageing Dev 2001 Apr 15;122(4):427-43. **Effect of the degree of fatty
acid unsaturation of rat heart mitochondria on their rates of H2O2 production
and lipid and protein oxidative damage.** Herrero A, Portero-Otin M, Bellmunt
MJ, Pamplona R, Barja G. Previous comparative studies have shown that long-
lived animals have lower fatty acid double bond content in their mitochondrial
membranes than short-lived ones. In order to ascertain whether this trait
protects mitochondria by decreasing lipid and protein oxidation and oxygen
radical generation, the double bond content of rat heart mitochondrial
membranes was manipulated by chronic feeding with semi-purified AIN-93G diets
rich in highly unsaturated (UNSAT) or saturated (SAT) oils. UNSAT rat heart
mitochondria had significantly higher double bond content and lipid
peroxidation than SAT mitochondria. They also showed increased levels of the
markers of protein oxidative damage malondialdehyde-lysine, protein carbonyls,
and N(e)-(carboxymethyl)lysine adducts. These results demonstrate that
increasing the degree of fatty acid unsaturation of heart mitochondria
increases oxidative damage to their lipids and proteins, and can also increase
their rates of mitochondrial oxygen radical generation in situations in which
the degree of reduction of Complex III is higher than normal. These
observations strengthen the notion that the relatively low double bond content
of the membranes of long-lived animals could have evolved to protect them from
oxidative damage.  

Biochem J. 1994 May 15;300 ( Pt 1):251-5. **Regulation of fibrinolysis by non-
esterified fatty acids.** Higazi AA, Aziza R, Samara AA, Mayer M. 
**Examination of the fatty acid specificity showed that a minimal chain length
of 16 carbon atoms and the presence of at least one double bond, preferably in
a cis configuration, were required for inhibition of the fibrinolytic activity
of plasmin.**  

Science. 1976 Feb 27;191(4229):861-2. **Nicotinic acid reduction of plasma
volume loss after thermal trauma.** Hilton JG, Wells CH. Intravenous
administration of nicotinic acid to the anesthetized dog prior to thermal
trauma reduced plasma loss at 10 minutes after burn from 7 milliliters per
kilogram to less than 2 millimeters per kilogram. During the next 50 minutes
plasma loss was the same in treated and untreated animals. An additional dose
of nicotinic acid 30 minutes after burn prevented this further loss.  

Z Gesamte Inn Med. 1976 Oct 15;31(20):838-43. **[Age-dependence of
catecholamine effects in man. IV. Effects of specific inhibitors on the
lipolytic action of alpha and beta adrenergics]** [in German] Hoffmann H.  

Neurochem Res. 2000 Feb;25(2):269-76. **Cortical impact injury in rats
promotes a rapid and sustained increase in polyunsaturated free fatty acids
and diacylglycerols.** Homayoun P, Parkins NE, Soblosky J, Carey ME, Rodriguez
de Turco EB, Bazan NG. **** At day one, free 22:6 and 22:6-DAGs showed the
greatest increase (590% and 230%, respectively). These results suggest that
TBI elicits the hydrolysis of phospholipids enriched in excitable membranes,
targeting early on 20:4-phospholipids (by 30 min post- trauma) and followed 24
hours later by **preferential hydrolysis of DHA-phospholipids. These lipid
metabolic changes may contribute to the initiation and maturation of neuronal
and fiber track degeneration observed following cortical impact injury.**  

Thromb Res. 1989 Jan 1;53(1):45-53. **Normalization by dietary cod-liver oil
of reduced thrombogenesis in essential fatty acid deficient rats.** Hornstra
G, Haddeman E, Don JA.  

Radiographics. 2003 Nov-Dec;23(6):1561-7. **CT Findings in Sclerosing
Mesenteritis (Panniculitis): Spectrum of Disease.** Horton KM, Lawler LP,
Fishman EK.  

Nutr Cancer. 1985;7(4):199-209. **Isomeric fatty acids and tumorigenesis: a
commentary on recent work.** Hunter JE, Ip C, Hollenbach EJ. Neither
epidemiological nor experimental studies published to date have demonstrated
any valid association between trans fatty acid ingestion and tumorigenesis. A
recent study showed that under controlled conditions, a fat with a high
content of trans fatty acids did not promote the development of mammary tumors
induced in rats by 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene to any greater extent than
did a comparable fat with a high content of cis fatty acids. In addition, in
this **study a high trans fat was less tumor promoting than was a blend of
fats that simulated the dietary fat composition of the United States and had a
lower level of trans fatty acids.**   

Medicina (B Aires). 1978 Mar-Apr;38(2):215. **[Progesterone and
retroperitoneal fibrosis]** [in Spanish] Introzzi A.[Letter]  

Cancer Res. 1985 May;45(5):1997-2001. **Requirement of essential fatty acid
for mammary tumorigenesis in the rat.** Ip C, Carter CA, Ip MM.  **Mammary
tumorigenesis was very sensitive to linoleate intake and increased
proportionately in the range of 0.5 to 4.4% of dietary linoleate.**

Biochim Biophys Acta. 1984 Nov 6;802(1):17-23. **Activation of bovine
platelets induced by long-chain unsaturated fatty acids at just below their
lytic concentrations, and its mechanism.** Kitagawa S, Endo J, Kametani F.  

Clin Exp Metastasis 2000;18(5):371-7. **Promotion of colon cancer metastases
in rat liver by fish oil diet is not due to reduced stroma formation.**
Klieveri L, Fehres O, Griffini P, Van Noorden CJ, Frederiks WM. **Recently,
it was demonstrated that dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)
induce 10-fold more metastases in number and 1000-fold in volume in an animal
model of colon cancer metastasis in rat liver.**  

Folia Haematol Int Mag Klin Morphol Blutforsch. 1977;104(1):1-10. **[Review:
hemorrhagic diathesis resulting from acute exposure to ionizing Radiation]**
[Article in German] Krantz S, Lober M. The symptoms of the acute radiopathy
are chiefly characterized by a severe blood coagulation disorder. The main
results and problems of research work on this haemorrhagic diathesis are
shortly reviewed.  

Prostaglandins. 1978 Apr;15(4):557-64. **Prostaglandin I2 as a potentiator of
acute inflammation in rats.** Komoriya K, Ohmori H, Azuma A, Kurozumi S,
Hashimoto Y, Nicolaou KC, Barnette WE, Magolda RL.  

Gerontology 1993;39(1):7-18. **Modulation of membrane phospholipid fatty acid
composition by age and food restriction.** Laganiere S, Yu BP. H.M.
Phospholipids from liver mitochondrial and microsomal membrane preparations
were analyzed to further assess the effects of age and lifelong calorie
restriction on membrane lipid composition. **The data revealed
characteristic patterns of age-related changes in ad libitum (AL) fed rats:**
**membrane levels of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, 22:4 and 22:5,
increased progressively, while membrane linoleic acid (18:2) decreased
steadily with age. Levels of 18:2 fell by approximately 40%, and 22:5 content
almost doubled making the peroxidizability index increase with age.**   **We
concluded that the membrane-stabilizing action of long-term calorie
restriction relates to the selective modification of membrane long-chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids during aging.**   

Medicina (B Aires). 1978 Mar-Apr;38(2):123-32. **[Effective treatment of
several types of fibromatosis with progesterone. Fibrous mediastinitis,
desmoid tumors, paraneoplastic fibrosis]** [in Spanish] Lanari A, Molinas FC,
Castro Rios M, Paz RA.  

Medicina (B Aires). 1979 Nov-Dec;39(6):826-35. **[Progesterone in fibromatosis
and atherosclerosis]** [in Spanish] Lanari A.  

Free Radic Biol Med 1999 Feb;26(3-4):260-5. **Modulation of cardiac
mitochondrial membrane fluidity by age and calorie intake.** Lee J, Yu BP,
Herlihy JT. **The fatty acid composition of the mitochondrial membranes of
the two ad lib fed groups differed: the long-chain polyunsaturated 22:4 fatty
acid was higher in the older group, although linoleic acid (18:2) was lower.
DR eliminated the differences.** Considered together, these results suggest
that DR **maintains the integrity of the cardiac mitochondrial membrane
fluidity by minimizing membrane damage through modulation of membrane fatty
acid profile.**  

Lipids 2001 Jun;36(6):589-93. **Effect of dietary restriction on age-related
increase of liver susceptibility to peroxidation in rats.** Leon TI, Lim BO,
Yu BP, Lim Y, Jeon EJ, Park DK.  

Acta Chir Scand. 1976;142(1):20-5. **Induction of endogenous fibrinolysis
inhibition in the dog. Effect of intravascular coagulation and release of free
fatty acids.** Lindquist O, Bagge L, Saldeen T. In all groups subjected to
infusion of thrombin an increase in plasma free fatty acids (FFA) was
observed. The role of this increase for the development **of fibrinolysis
inhibition was tested by infusion of norepinephrine alone and in combination
with nicotinic acid. Norepinephrine caused an increase of FFA after 2 hours
and in urokinase inhibitor activity after 24-48 hours.** Both of these were
diminished by high doses of nicotinic acid, indicating that the release of FFA
rather than intravascular coagulation might be the principal mechanism
underlying the occurrence of fibrinolysis inhibition following trauma.  

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990 Nov;87(22):8845-9. **Incorporation of marine
lipids into mitochondrial membranes increases susceptibility to damage by
calcium and reactive oxygen species: evidence for enhanced activation of
phospholipase A2 in mitochondria enriched with n-3 fatty acids.** Malis CD,
Weber PC, Leaf A, Bonventre JV.  

Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1994 Jul;51(1):33-40. **Suppression
of human T-cell growth in vitro by cis-unsaturated fatty acids: relationship
to free radicals and lipid peroxidation.** Madhavi N, Das UN, Prabha PS, Kumar
GS, Koratkar R, Sagar PS.  

Clin Exp Metastasis 1998 Jul;16(5):407-14. **Diminution of the development of
experimental metastases produced by murine metastatic lines in essential fatty
acid-deficient host mice.** Mannini A, Calorini L, Mugnai G, Ruggieri S.  

Biochem Pharmacol. 1990 Mar 1;39(5):879-89. **Histamine release from rat mast
cells induced by metabolic activation of polyunsaturated fatty acids into free
radicals.** Masini E, Palmerani B, Gambassi F, Pistelli A, Giannella E,
Occupati B, Ciuffi M, Sacchi TB, Mannaioni PF.  

Journal of Lipid Research, Vol. 44, 271-279, February 2003. **Arachidonic acid
and prostacyclin signaling promote adipose tissue development : a human health
concern?** F. Massiera, P. Saint-Marc, J. Seydoux , T. Murata , T. Kobayashi ,
S. Narumiya , P. Guesnet, Ez-Zoubir Amri, R. Negrel and G. Ailhaud1.  

Infection. 1994 Mar-Apr;22(2):106-12. **Influence of dietary
(n-3)-polyunsaturated fatty acids on leukotriene B4 and prostaglandin E2
synthesis and course of experimental tuberculosis in guinea pigs.** Mayatepek
E, Paul K, Leichsenring M, Pfisterer M, Wagner D, Domann M, Sonntag HG, Bremer
HJ.  

Biochim Biophys Acta 1994 Sep 15;1214(2):209-20. **Reinvestigation of lipid
peroxidation of linolenic acid.** Mlakar A, Spiteller G. Thus, a great number
of previously unknown lipid peroxidation products was detected. It is assumed
that these compounds also occur--at least as intermediates--in lipid
peroxidation processes in mammalian tissue.  

Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2003 May;68(5):305-10. **Synergistic
effect of D-003 and aspirin on experimental thrombosis models.** Molina V,
Arruzazabala ML, Carbajal D, Mas R.  

Chem Res Toxicol. 2001 Apr;14(4):431-7. **Defining mechanisms of toxicity for
linoleic acid monoepoxides and diols in Sf-21 cells.** Moran JH, Mon T,
Hendrickson TL, Mitchell LA, Grant DF.  

J Biochem (Tokyo). 1977 Aug;82(2):529-33. **Effects of free fatty acids on
fibrinolytic activity.** Muraoka T, Okuda H. A novel method for the estimation
of fibrinolytic activity is proposed. In this method, a fibrin clot suspension
is used as a substrate (fibrin is known to be a physiological substrate of
plasmin). The fibrin clot suspension was prepared by homogenization of human
fibrin clots. With this method, we found that free fatty **acids inhibited the
plasmin activity, and long-chain, unsaturated free fatty acids had a
particularly strong inhibitory action on plasmin. As regards the mechanism of
the inhibitory action, free fatty acids may not inhibit complex formation
between plasmin and fibirin, but may make it impossible for plasmin to act on
fibrin due to deformation of the surface of the fibrin clot.**  

Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 1986 Jun;10(3):271-3. **Dietary factors and alcoholic
cirrhosis.** Nanji AA, French SW.  

Gastroenterology. 1995 Aug;109(2):547-54. **Dietary saturated fatty acids: a
novel treatment for alcoholic liver disease.** Nanji AA, Sadrzadeh SM, Yang
EK, Fogt F, Meydani M, Dannenberg AJ.  

J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1996 Jun;277(3):1694-700. **Medium chain triglycerides
and vitamin E reduce the severity of established experimental alcoholic liver
disease.** Nanji AA, Yang EK, Fogt F, Sadrzadeh SM, Dannenberg AJ.  

Hepatology. 1997 Dec;26(6):1538-45. **Dietary saturated fatty acids down-
regulate cyclooxygenase-2 and tumor necrosis factor alfa and reverse fibrosis
in alcohol-induced liver disease in the rat.** Nanji AA, Zakim D, Rahemtulla
A, Daly T, Miao L, Zhao S, Khwaja S, Tahan SR, Dannenberg AJ.  

J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2001 Nov;299(2):638-44. **Dietary saturated fatty acids
reverse inflammatory and fibrotic changes in rat liver despite continued
ethanol administration.** Nanji AA, Jokelainen K, Tipoe GL, Rahemtulla A,
Dannenberg AJ.  

Gastroenterology 1995 Apr;108(4):1124-35. **Accumulation and cellular
localization of fibrinogen/fibrin during short-term and long-term rat liver
injury.** Neubauer K, Knittel T, Armbrust T, Ramadori G  **Fibrinogen/fibrin
deposition in damaged livers was studied by immunohistology.**
Immunohistology showed striking amounts of fibrinogen and fibrin deposits in
pericentral necrotic areas (short-term damage) and within fibrotic septa
(long-term damage). The results show fibrinogen/fibrin deposition during
short-term liver injury and liver fibrogenesis, which may suggest the
involvement of a "clotting-like process" in short-term liver damage and liver
fibrosis. The data might indicate that fibrin/fibronectin constitute a
"provisional matrix," which affects the attraction and proliferation of
inflammatory and matrix-producing cells.  

Ophthalmic Res. 1999;31(4):273-9. **Age-related accumulation of free
polyunsaturated fatty acids in human retina.** Nourooz-Zadeh J, Pereira P.  

Chem Res Toxicol. 2002 Mar;15(3):367-72. **Formation of cyclic deoxyguanosine
adducts from omega-3 and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids under oxidative
conditions.** Pan J, Chung FL.  

Radiobiologiia. 1985 Nov-Dec;25(6):763-7. **[Mechanism of circulatory
disorders in animals irradiated at high doses]** [in Russian] Pozharisskaia
TD, Vasil'eva TP, Sokolova EN, Alekseeva II. Some data are reported on
pathoanatomical changes, a status of the microcirculatory channel and the
coagulogram of animals affected by high doses of ionizing radiation. **The
signs of disseminated intravascular blood coagulation have been revealed.**  

J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):13605-12. **Formation of isoprostane-like
compounds (neuroprostanes) in vivo from docosahexaenoic acid.** Roberts LJ
2nd, Montine TJ, Markesbery WR, Tapper AR, Hardy P, Chemtob S, Dettbarn WD,
Morrow JD.  

Nutr Cancer 1995;24(1):33-45. **Effects of linoleic acid and gamma-linolenic
acid on the growth and metastasis of a human breast cancer cell line in nude
mice and on its growth and invasive capacity in vitro.** Rose DP, Connolly JM,
Liu XH  

Arch Toxicol. 1997;71(9):563-74. **Impaired cellular immune response in rats
exposed perinatally to Baltic Sea herring oil or 2,3,7,8-TCDD.** Ross PS, de
Swart RL, van der Vliet H, Willemsen L, de Klerk A, van Amerongen G, Groen J,
Brouwer A, Schipholt I, Morse DC, van Loveren H, Osterhaus AD, Vos JG.  

Nutr Cancer 1998;30(2):137-43. **Effects of dietary n-3-to-n-6 polyunsaturated
fatty acid ratio on mammary carcinogenesis in rats.** Sasaki T, Kobayashi Y,
Shimizu J, Wada M, In'nami S, Kanke Y, Takita T. An increase in the n-3/n-6
ratio did not suppress the incidence or reduce the latency of mammary tumor
development. **The number and weight of mammary tumors per tumor-bearing rat
tended to be large in the group with an n-3/n-6 ratio of 7.84 compared with
those in the other groups. As the n-3/n-6 ratios were elevated, the total
number and weight of tumors increased gradually.**   

J. Biol. Chem. 1940 132: 539-551. **Essential fatty acids, vitamin B** **6**
**, and other factors in the cure of rat acrodynia**. H. Schneider, H.
Steenbock, and Blanche R. Platz  

Science. 1988 May 20;240(4855):1032-3. **Essential fatty acid depletion of
renal allografts and prevention of rejection.** Schreiner GF, Flye W, Brunt E,
Korber K, Lefkowith JB.  

Physiol Bohemoslov. 1990;39(2):125-34. **Proportion of individual fatty acids
in the non-esterified (free) fatty acid (FFA) fraction in the serum of
laboratory rats of different ages.** Smidova L, Base J, Mourek J, Cechova I.  

Placenta. 2003 Nov;24(10):965-73. **Augmented PLA(2)Activity in Pre-eclamptic
Decidual Tissue-A Key Player in the Pathophysiology of 'Acute Atherosis' in
Pre-eclampsia?** Staff AC, Ranheim T, Halvorsen B.  

Acta Neurochir Suppl (Wien) 1994;60:20-3 **. Mechanisms of glial swelling by
arachidonic acid.** Staub F, Winkler A, Peters J, Kempski O, Baethmann A.

Arch Biochem Biophys. 1991 Aug 15;289(1):33-8. **A possible mechanism of
mitochondrial dysfunction during cerebral ischemia: inhibition of
mitochondrial respiration activity by arachidonic acid.** Takeuchi Y, Morii H,
Tamura M, Hayaishi O, Watanabe Y.  

J Drug Target. 2003 Jan;11(1):45-52. **Modulation of tumor-selective vascular
blood flow and extravasation by the stable prostaglandin 12 analogue beraprost
sodium.** Tanaka S, Akaike T, Wu J, Fang J, Sawa T, Ogawa M, Beppu T, Maeda H.  

Am J Clin Nutr. 2003 May;77(5):1125-32. **Effect of individual dietary fatty
acids on postprandial activation of blood coagulation factor VII and
fibrinolysis in healthy young men.** Tholstrup T, Miller GJ, Bysted A,
Sandstrom B.  

Biochem Soc Trans. 2003 Oct;31(Pt 5):1075-9. **Regression of pre-established
atherosclerosis in the apoE-/- mouse by conjugated linoleic acid.** Toomey S,
Roche H, Fitzgerald D, Belton O.  

Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2003 May;35(5):749-55. **Increased muscle proteasome
activities in rats fed a polyunsaturated fatty acid supplemented diet.**
Vigouroux S, Farout L, Clavel S, Briand Y, Briand M. Changes in the
proteasome system, a dominant actor in protein degradation in eukaryotic
cells, have been documented in a large number of physiological and
pathological conditions. With the polyunsaturated fatty acid enriched diet,
the chymotrypsin-like and peptidylglutamylpeptide hydrolase activities
increased by 45% in soleus and extensor digitorum longus (EDL), and by 90% in
the gastrocnemius medialis (GM) muscle. Trypsin-like activity of the
proteasome increased by 250% in soleus, EDL and GM. Proteasome activities
and level were less stimulated with a monounsaturated fatty acid supplemented
diet. Unsaturated fatty acids are particularly prone to free radical attack.
Thus, we suggest that alterations in muscle proteasome may result from
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acid-induced peroxidation, in order
to eliminate damaged proteins.  

J Am Coll Nutr. 2000 Aug;19(4):478S-486S. **Conjugated linoleic acid and bone
biology.** Watkins BA, Seifert MF. Recent investigations with **** growing
rats given butter fat and supplements of CLA demonstrated an increased rate of
bone formation and reduced ex vivo bone PGE2 production, respectively.  

Ups J Med Sci. 1979;84(3):195-201. **Effect of nicotinic acid on the
posttraumatic increase in free fatty acids and fibrinolysis inhibition
activity in the rat.** Wegener T, Bagge L, Saldeen T. Nicotinic acid
effectively inhibited the posttraumatic increase in both free fatty acids
(FFA) and fibrinolysis inhibition activity (FIA) in the blood in rats,
indicating that FFA might be involved in the posttraumatic increase of FIA.
The FIA in the liver was greater than that in other organs studied and was
increased in the posttraumatic phase. The possible role of the liver in the
posttraumatic increase of FIA is discussed.  

Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2001 Mar;280(3):R908-12. **CLA reduces
antigen-induced histamine and PGE(2) release from sensitized guinea pig
tracheae.** Whigham LD, Cook EB, Stahl JL, Saban R, Bjorling DE, Pariza MW,
Cook ME.  

Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1993 May;120(1):72-9. **Essential fatty acid deficiency
in cultured human keratinocytes attenuates toxicity due to lipid
peroxidation.** Wey HE, Pyron L, Woolery M.  

Nutrition. 2002 Jul-Aug;18(7-8):647-53. **Dietary fat composition alters
pulmonary function in pigs.** Wolfe RR, Martini WZ, Irtun O, Hawkins HK,
Barrow RE.  
  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

