![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
The Great Fish Oil Experiment**  
  
Reading medical journals and following the mass media, it's easy to get the
idea that fish oil is something any sensible person should use. It's rare to
see anything suggesting that it could be dangerous.  
  
During the recent years in which the U.S. government has gone from warning
against the consumption of too much of these omega-3 oils _("to assure that
the combined daily intake of two fatty acids that are components" "(i.e.,
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)) would not exceed 3
grams per person per day (g/p/d)")_ to sponsoring biased industry claims,
there has been considerable accumulation of information about the dangers of
fish oils and omega-3 fatty acids. But there has been an even greater increase
in the industry's promotional activities.  
  
The US government and the mass media selectively promote research that is
favorable to the fish oil industry. The editorial boards of oil research
journals often include industry representatives, and their editorial decisions
favor research conclusions that promote the industry, in the way that
editorial decisions in previous decades favored articles that denied the
dangers of radiation and reported that estrogen cures almost everything.
Marcia Angell, former editor of the NEJM, has observed that the "significant
results" reported in published studies can be properly interpreted only by
knowing how many studies reporting opposite results were rejected by the
editors.  
  
One way to evaluate published studies is to see whether they tell you
everything you would need to know to replicate the experiment, and whether the
information they provide is adequate for drawing the conclusions they draw,
for example whether they compared the experimental subjects to proper control
subjects. With just a few minimal critical principles of this sort, most
"scientific" publications on nutrition, endocrinology, cancer and other
degenerative diseases are seen to be unscientific. In nutritional experiments
with fish oil, controls must receive similar amounts of vitamins A, D, E, and
K, and should include fat free or "EFA" deficient diets for comparison.  
  
In declaring EPA and DHA to be safe, the FDA neglected to evaluate their
antithyroid, immunosuppressive, lipid peroxidative (Song et al., 2000), light
sensitizing, and antimitochondrial effects, their depression of glucose
oxidation (Delarue et al., 2003), and their contribution to metastatic cancer
(Klieveri, et al., 2000), lipofuscinosis and liver damage, among other
problems.  
  
=========================================  
  
"Houston-based Omega Protein Inc.'s bottom line may get a little fatter.  
  
The publicly traded company, which produces an Omega-3 fatty acid product
called OmegaPure, has signed an agreement to provide its fish oil in school
lunches in 38 school districts in South Texas beginning this month.  
  
The 500-person company, which has ties to former President George Bush's
Zapata Corp., will distribute the product through an agreement with Mercedes-
based H&H Foods.  
  
Although the dollar amount of the contract between Omega Protein and H&H Foods
hinges on future sales, the company is poised to cash in as school
administrators and parents refocus their attention on the nutritional content
of student diets.  
  
Omega Protein President and CEO Joseph von Rosenberg says the company's recent
investment of $16.5 million for a fish oil refinery in Reedville, Va.,
scheduled for completion in May, and an increased awareness of the benefits of
Omega-3 in human food, positions Omega to capitalize on predicted demand."  
  
Jenna Colley  
Houston Business Journal  
  
=========================================  
  
Andrew Weil was on the radio recently recommending DHA (usually found in fish
oil*) to treat depression, and I think that means that a lot of people are
buying it and eating it. A few years ago the government declared that it was
"generally regarded as safe" and approved its use in baby formula, and a few
months ago Texas school districts contracted with Omega Protein (which grew
out of the Bush family's Zapata Corporation) to provide menhaden fish oil for
school lunches. Between the 1950s and the 1970s, people were assured that
eating polyunsaturated seed oils would protect them against heart disease.
There's no evidence that the bad outcome of that campaign decreased the
gullibility of the public. They are happily joining in the latest public
health experiment.

  
_*Weil recommends eating "oily fish"--"wild Alaskan salmon, mackerel,
sardines, or herring"--. "If you do take supplements, fish oil is a better
source of DHA than algae"  
_  
When a group of people in government and industry decide on a policy, they can
use carrots (good jobs, grants, and prestige) and sticks (loss of jobs and
grants, organized slander, and worse) to make their guidelines clear, and most
people will choose to follow those cues, even if they know that the policy is
wrong. Historically, policy makers have told the public that "radiation is
good for you," "estrogen will make you fertile (or safely infertile) and
feminine and strong and intelligent," "starchy foods will prevent diabetes and
obesity," "using diuretics and avoiding salt will make pregnancy safer," and
that the polyunsaturated fatty acids are "nutritionally essential, and will
prevent heart disease."  
**_  
_**The original "essential fatty acids" were linoleic, linolenic, and
arachidonic acids. Now that the toxic effects of those are coming to be
recognized, new "essential fatty acids," the omega-3 fatty acids, including
those with long chains, found in fish oils, are said to make babies more
intelligent, to be necessary for good vision, and to prevent cancer, heart
disease, obesity, arthritis, depression, epilepsy, psychosis, dementia,
ulcers, eczema and dry skin.  
With just a normal amount of vitamin E in the diet, cod liver oil is certain
to be highly oxidized in the tissues of a mammal that eats a lot of it, and an
experiment with dogs showed that it could increase their cancer mortality from
the normal 5% to 100%. Although fish oils rapidly destroy vitamin E in the
body, some of them, especially the liver oils, can provide useful vitamins, A
and D. In studies comparing fish oil diets with standard diets, these
nutrients, as well as any toxins besides fatty acids (Huang, et al., 1997;
Miyazaki, et al., 1998) in either type of oil, should be taken into account,
but they seldom are.

  
Despite the nutritional value of those vitamins, fish oils are generally much
more immunosuppressive than the seed oils, and the early effects of fish oil
on the "immune system" include the suppression of prostaglandin synthesis,
because the more highly unsaturated long chain fats interfere with the
conversion of linoleic acid into arachidonic acid and prostaglandins. The
prostaglandins are so problematic that their suppression is helpful, whether
the inhibition is caused by aspirin or vitamin E, or by fish oil.

  
Some of the important antiinflammatory effects of fish oil result from the
oxidized oils, rather than the unchanged oils (Sethi, 2002; Chaudhary, et al.,
2004). These oils are so unstable that they begin to spontaneously oxidize
even before they reach the bloodstream.

  
In experiments that last just a few weeks or months, there may not be time for
cancers to develop, and on that time scale, the immunosuppressive and
antiinflammatory effects of oxidized fish oil might seem beneficial. For a few
decades, x-ray treatments were used to relieve inflammatory conditions, and
most of the doctors who promoted the treatment were able to retire before
their patients began suffering the fatal effects of atrophy, fibrosis, and
cancer. (But a few people are still advocating x-ray therapy for inflammatory
diseases, e.g., Hildebrandt, et al., 2003.) The fish oil fad is now just as
old as the x-ray fad was at its peak of popularity, and if its
antiinflammatory actions involve the same mechanisms as the antiinflammatory
immunosuppressive x-ray treatments, then we can expect to see another epidemic
of fibrotic conditions and cancer in about 15 to 20 years.  
Around 1970 researchers reported that animals given fish oil in their food
lived longer than animals on the standard diet. Alex Comfort, who was familiar
with the research showing that simple reduction of food intake increased
longevity, observed that the animals were very reluctant to eat the food
containing smelly fish oil, and were eating so little food that their
longevity could be accounted for by their reduced caloric intake. Even when
"fresh" deodorized fish oil is added to the diet, its spontaneous oxidation
before it reaches the animal's tissues reduces its caloric value. Without
antioxidants, fish oil is massively degraded within 48 hours, and even with a
huge amount of antioxidant there is still considerable degradation (Gonzalez,
1988; Klein, et al., 1990).  
Fish oil has been used for hundreds of years as varnish or for fuel in lamps,
and the fatty fish have been used as fertilizer and animal feed, and later the
hydrogenated solid form of the oil, which is more stable, has been used in
Europe as a food substitute for people. When whale hunting was reduced around
1950, fish oil was substituted for whale oil in margarine production. Like the
seed oils, such as linseed oil, the fish oils were mostly replaced by
petroleum derivatives in the paint industry after the 1960s.

  
Although by 1980 many animal diseases were known to be caused by eating oily
fish, and the unsaturated oils were known to accelerate the formation of the
"age pigment," lipofuscin, many "beneficial effects" of dietary fish oil
started appearing in research journals around that time, and the mass media,
responding to the industry's public relations campaign, began ignoring studies
that showed harmful effects from eating fish oil.

  
When reviewers in professional journals begin to ignore valid research whose
conclusions are harmful to the fish oil industry, we can see that the policy
guidelines set by the industry and its agents in government have become clear.
Around the end of the century, we begin to see a strange literary device
appearing, in which research reports on the toxic effects of omega-3 oils are
prefaced by remarks to the effect that "we all know how great these oils are
for good health." I think I detect groveling and shuffling of the feet by
authors who want to get their work published. If you are willing to say that
your work probably doesn't mean what it seems to mean, maybe they will publish
it.

  
For more than 50 years, the great majority of the medical publications on
estrogen were part of the drug industry's campaign to fraudulently gain
billions of dollars, and anyone who cared to analyze them could see that the
authors and editors were part of a cult, rather than seekers of useful
knowledge. Likewise, the doctrine of the harmlessness of x-rays and
radioactive fallout was kept alive for several decades by demonizing all who
challenged it. It now looks as though we are in danger of entering another
period of medical-industrial-governmental cultism, this time to promote the
universal use of polyunsaturated fats as both drugs and foods.  
In 2004, a study of 29,133 men reported that the use of omega-3 oil or
consumption of fish didn't decrease depression or suicide, and in 2001, a
study of 42,612 men and women reported that after more than 9 years the use of
cod liver oil showed no protective effect against coronary heart disease
(Hakkarainen, et al., 2004; Egeland, et al., 2001).

  
The most popular way of arguing that fish oil will prevent heart disease is to
show that it lowers blood lipids, continuing the old approach of the American
Heart Association's "heart protective diet." Unfortunately for that argument,
it's now known that the triglycerides in the blood are decreased because of
the fish oil's toxic effects on the liver (Hagve and Christophersen, 1988;
Ritskes-Hoitinga, et al., 1998). In experiments with rats, EPA and DHA lowered
blood lipids only when given to rats that had been fed, in which case the fats
were incorporated into tissues, and suppressed mitochondrial respiration
(Osmundsen, et al., 1998).

  
The belief that eating cholesterol causes heart disease was based mainly on
old experiments with rabbits, and subsequent experiments have made it clear
that it is **_oxidized_** cholesterol that damages the arteries (Stapran, et
al., 1997). Since both fish oil and oxidized cholesterol damage rabbits'
arteries, and since the lipid peroxides associated with fish oil attack a
great variety of biological materials, including the LDL lipoproteins carrying
cholesterol, the implications **** of the rabbit experiments now seem very
different.

  
Another way of arguing for the use of fish oil or other omega-3 fats is to
show a correlation between disease and a decreased amount of EPA, DHA, or
arachidonic acid in the tissues, and to say "these oils are deficient, the
disease is caused by a deficiency of essential fatty acids." Those oils are
extremely susceptible to oxidation, so they tend to spontaneously disappear in
response to tissue injury, cellular excitation, the increased energy demands
of stress, exposure to toxins or ionizing radiation, or even exposure to
light. That spontaneous oxidation is what made them useful as varnish or paint
medium. But it is what makes them sensitize the tissues to injury. Their
"deficiency" in the tissues frequently corresponds to the intensity of
oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation; it is usually their presence, rather
than their deficiency, that created the disposition for the disease.

  
One of the earliest harmful effects of polyunsaturated fatty acids, PUFA, to
be observed was their acceleration of the formation of lipofuscin or ceroid,
the "age pigment," during oxidative stress or vitamin E deficiency. Associated
with the formation of lipofuscin, the PUFA were discovered to cause
degeneration of the gonads and brain, and the fact that vitamin E could
prevent some of their toxic effects led to the idea that vitamin E was
essentially an antioxidant. Unfortunately, the protective effect of vitamin E
against the PUFA is only partial (Allard, et al., 1997).

  
The degenerative diseases are all associated with disturbances involving fat
metabolism and lipid peroxidation. Alzheimer's disease, alcoholic and
nonalcoholic liver disease, retinal degeneration, epilepsy, AIDS, diabetes,
and a variety of circulatory problems involve breakdown products of the PUFA.
The products of PUFA decomposition include acrolein, malondialdehyde,
hydroxynonenal, crotonaldehyde, ethane, pentane, and the neuroprostanes, which
are prostaglandin-like molecules formed from DHA by free radical lipid
peroxidation products, especially in the brain and at a higher level in
Alzheimer's disease.

  
The reactions of three types of cell--vascular endothelium, nerve cells, and
thymus cells--to the PUFA will illustrate some of the important processes
involved in their toxicity.

  
When the body doesn't have enough glucose, free fatty acids are released from
the tissues, and their oxidation blocks the oxidation of glucose even when it
becomes available from the breakdown of protein caused by cortisol, which is
released during glucose deprivation. Cells of the thymus are sensitive to
glucose deprivation, and even in the presence of glucose, cortisol prevents
them from using glucose, causing them to take up fatty acids. The thymic cells
die easily when exposed either to excess cortisol, or deficient glucose. The
polyunsaturated fatty acids **** linoleate, arachidonate, and
eicosapentaenoic, are especially toxic to thymic cells by preventing their
inactivation of cortisol, increasing its action. (Klein, et al., 1987, 1989,
1990). Lymphocytes from people with AIDS and leukemia are less able to
metabolize cortisol. An extract of serum from AIDS patients caused lymphocytes
exposed to cortisol to die 7 times faster than cells from healthy people. AIDS
patients have high levels of both cortisol and free polyunsaturated fatty
acids (Christeff, et al., 1988).  
The cytotoxicity caused by EPA and its metabolites (15 mg. of EPA per liter
killed over 90% of a certain type of macrophage) isn't inhibited by vitamin E
(Fyfe and Abbey, 2000). Immunological activation tends to kill T cells that
contain PUFA (Switzer, et al., 2003).

  
When animals are fed fish oil and then exposed to bacteria, their
immunosuppressed thymic (T) cells cause them to succumb to the infection more
easily than animals fed coconut oil or a fat free diet. Natural killer cells,
which eliminate cancer cells and virus infected cells, are decreased after
eating fish oil, and T suppressor cells are often increased. More subtle
interference with immunity is produced by the actions of PUFA on the "immune
synapse," a contact between cells that permits the transmission of
immunological information. The immunosuppressive effect of fish oil is
recognized as a useful aid in preventing the rejection of transplanted organs,
but some studies are showing that survival a year after transplantation isn't
improved.

  
Polyunsaturated fatty acids, especially those that can be turned into
prostaglandins, are widely involved in causing inflammation and vascular
leakiness. EPA and DHA don't form ordinary prostaglandins, though the
isoprostanes and neuroprostanes they produce during lipid peroxidation behave
in many ways like the more common prostaglandins, and their enzymically formed
eicosanoids have some functions similar to those of the common prostaglandins.
The brain contains a very high concentration of these unstable fatty acids,
and they are released in synapses by ordinary excitatory process.

  
Chan, et al., 1983, found that polyunsaturated fats caused brain swelling and
increased blood vessel permeability. In 1988, Chan's group found that DHA and
other polyunsaturated fatty acids added to cultured cells from the cerebral
cortex produced free radicals and stimulated production of malondialdehyde and
lactate, and inhibited the uptake of glutamic acid, which suggests that they
would contribute to prolonged excitation of the nerves (Yu, et al., 1986). In
brain slices, the polyunsaturated fatty acids caused the production of free
radicals and swelling of the tissue, and the saturated fatty acids didn't
(Chan and Fishman, 1980). The PUFA inhibited the respiration of mitochondria
in brain cells (Hillered and Chan, 1988), and at a higher concentration,
caused them to swell (Hillered and Chan, 1989), but saturated fatty acids
didn't produce edema. Free radical activity was shown to cause the liberation
of free fatty acids from the cellular structure (Chan, et al., 1982, 1984).
The activation of lipases by free radicals and lipid peroxides, with the loss
of potassium from the cells, suggests that excitation can become a self-
stimulating process, leading to cellular destruction.

  
DHA itself, rather than its decomposition products, facilitates excitatory
(glutamate) nerve transmission (Nishikawa, et al., 1994), and that excitatory
action causes the release of arachidonic acid (Pellerin and Wolfe, 1991).

  
Considering just one of the products of fish oil peroxidation, acrolein, and a
few of its effects in cells, we can get an idea of the types of damage that
could result from increasing the amount of omega-3 fats in our tissues.  
The "barrier" between the brain and blood stream is one of the most effective
vascular barriers in the body, but it is very permeable to oils, and lipid
peroxidation disrupts it, damaging the ATPase that regulates sodium and
potassium (Stanimirovic, et al., 1995). Apparently, anything that depletes the
cell's energy, lowering ATP, allows an excess of calcium to enter cells,
contributing to their death (Ray, et al., 1994). Increasing intracellular
calcium activates phospholipases, releasing more polyunsaturated fats
(Sweetman, et al., 1995) The acrolein which is released during lipid
peroxidation inhibits mitochondrial function by poisoning the crucial
respiratory enzyme, cytochrome oxidase, resulting in a decreased ability to
produce energy (Picklo and Montine, 2001). (In the retina, the PUFA contribute
to light-induced damage of the energy producing ability of the cells [King,
2004], by damaging the same crucial enzyme.) Besides inhibiting the ability of
nerve cells to produce energy from the oxidation of glucose, acrolein inhibits
the ability of cells to regulate the excitatory amino acid glutamate (Lovell,
et al., 2000), contributing to the excitatory process. High levels of acrolein
(and other products of PUFA degradation) are found in the brain in Alzheimer's
disease (Lovell, et al., 2001).

  
The "prion" diseases, CJD and TSE/BSE (mad cow disease) have many features in
common with Alzheimer's disease, and several studies have shown that the
"prion" protein produces its damage by activating the lipases that release
polyunsaturated fatty acids and produce lipid peroxides (Bate, et al., 2004,
Stewart, et al., 2001).  
Acrolein reacts with DNA, causing "genetic" damage, and also reacts with the
lysine in proteins, for example contributing to the toxicity of oxidized low
density lipoproteins (LDL), the proteins that carry cholesterol and that
became famous because of their involvement in the development of
atherosclerosis that was supposedly caused by eating saturated fats.

  
My newsletter on mad cow disease discussed the evidence incriminating the use
of fish meal in animal feed, as a cause of the degenerative brain diseases,
and earlier newsletters (glycemia, and glycation) discussed the reasons for
thinking that inappropriate glycation of lysine groups in proteins, as a
result of a lack of protective carbon dioxide/carbamino groups, produces the
amyloid (or "prion") proteins that characterize the dementias. Acrolein,
produced from the decomposing "fish oils" in the brain, is probably the most
reactive product of lipid peroxidation in the brain, and so would be likely to
cause the glycation of lysine in the plaque-forming proteins.  
These toxic effects of acrolein in the brain are analogous to the multitude of
toxic effects of the omega-3 fatty acids and their breakdown products in all
of the other organs and tissues of the body. Cancer cells are unusual in their
degree of resistance to the lethal actions of the lipid peroxides, but the
inflammatory effects of the highly unsaturated fatty acids are now widely
recognized to be essentially involved in the process of cancerization (my
newsletters on cancer and leakiness discuss some of the ways the fats are
involved in tumor development).  
The fats that we synthesize from sugar, or coconut oil, or oleic acid, the
omega-9 series, are protective against the inflammatory PUFA, in some cases
more effective even than vitamin E.

  
In Woody Allen's 1973 movie, **_Sleeper,_** the protagonist woke up after
being frozen for 200 years, to find that saturated fats were health foods. At
the time the movie was made, that had already been established (e.g., Hartroft
and Porta, 1968 edition of _Present Knowledge in Nutrition_ , who showed that
adequate saturated fat in the diet helped to protect against the formation of
lipofuscin).  
  
PS:  
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds says 2004 has been the most
catastrophic breeding season on record for seabirds along UK coasts. It says
industrial fishing to supply fish meal and oil is barely sustainable and
imperils the whole marine food web.  
"The UK has suffered serious seabird disasters this year already. In Shetland
and Orkney, entire colonies of birds failed to produce any young because of
severe food shortages. "On top of that, hundreds of seabirds have been washing
ashore having perished at sea. Again, lack of food is thought to be one of the
reasons." The report, Assessment Of The Sustainability Of Industrial Fisheries
Producing Fish Meal And Fish Oil, was compiled for the RSPB by Poseidon
Aquatic Resource Management Ltd and the University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.  
  
REFERENCES  
  
Neuroreport. 2002 Oct 28;13(15):1933-8. **Cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors protect
against prion-induced neurotoxicity in vitro.** Bate C, Rutherford S, Gravenor
M, Reid S, Williams A.  
Neuroreport. 2004 Mar 1;15(3):509-13. **The role of platelet activating factor
in prion and amyloid-beta neurotoxicity.** Bate C, Salmona M, Williams A.  
J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36405-11. **Phospholipase A2 inhibitors or
platelet-activating factor antagonists prevent prion replication.** Bate C,
Reid S, Williams A.  
J Neurochem 1980 Oct;35(4):1004-7. **Transient formation of superoxide
radicals in polyunsaturated fatty acid-induced brain swelling.** Chan PH,
Fishman RA.  
Brain Res. 1982 Sep 23;248(1):151-7. **Alterations of membrane integrity and
cellular constituents by arachidonic acid in neuroblastoma and glioma cells.**
Chan PH, Fishman RA.  
J Neurochem. 1982 Feb;38(2):525-31. **Phospholipid degradation and cellular
edema induced by free radicals in brain cortical slices.** Chan PH, Yurko M,
Fishman RA.  
Ann Neurol. 1983 Jun;13(6):625-32. **Induction of brain edema following
intracerebral injection of arachidonic acid.** Chan PH, Fishman RA, Caronna J,
Schmidley JW, Prioleau G, Lee J.  
J Neurosci Res. 1984;12(4):595-605. **Release of polyunsaturated fatty acids
from phospholipids and alteration of brain membrane integrity by oxygen-
derived free radicals.** Chan PH, Fishman RA, Schmidley JW, Chen SF.  
J Neurochem 1988 Apr;50(4):1185-93. **Induction of intracellular superoxide
radical formation by arachidonic acid and by polyunsaturated fatty acids in
primary astrocytic cultures.** Chan PH, Chen SF, Yu AC.  
Clin Exp Immunol. 2002 Oct;130(1):12-8. **Dietary n-3 PUFA affect TcR-mediated
activation of purified murine T cells and accessory cell function in co-
cultures.** Chapkin RS, Arrington JL, Apanasovich TV, Carroll RJ, McMurray DN.  
J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30402-9. Epub 2004 Apr 14. **Nonenzymatic
glycation at the N terminus of pathogenic prion protein in transmissible
spongiform encephalopathies.** Choi YG, Kim JI, Jeon YC, Park SJ, Choi EK,
Rubenstein R, Kascsak RJ, Carp RI, Kim YS. Transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies (TSEs) are transmissible neurodegenerative diseases
characterized by the accumulation of an abnormally folded prion protein,
termed PrPSc, and the development of pathological features of astrogliosis,
vacuolation, neuronal cell loss, and in some cases amyloid plaques. Although
considerable structural characterization of prion protein has been reported,
neither the method of conversion of cellular prion protein, PrPC, into the
pathogenic isoform nor the post-translational modification processes involved
is known. We report that in animal and human **TSEs, one or more lysines at
residues 23, 24, and 27 of PrPSc are covalently modified with advanced
glycosylation end products (AGEs),** which may be carboxymethyl-lysine (CML),
one of the structural varieties of AGEs. The arginine residue at position 37
may also be modified with AGE, but not the arginine residue at position 25.
This result suggests that nonenzymatic glycation is one of the post-
translational modifications of PrP(Sc). Furthermore, immunostaining studies
indicate that, at least in clinically affected hamsters, astrocytes are the
first site of this glycation process.  
Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1988 Jul;24(7):1179-83. **Abnormal free fatty acids
and cortisol concentrations in the serum of AIDS patients.** Christeff N,
Michon C, Goertz G, Hassid J, Matheron S, Girard PM, Coulaud JP, Nunez EA  
Lipids. 1996 Aug;31(8):829-37. **Effect of dietary n-9 eicosatrienoic acid on
the fatty acid composition of plasma lipid fractions and tissue
phospholipids.** Cleland LG, Neumann MA, Gibson RA, Hamazaki T, Akimoto K,
James MJ.  
J Nutr. 1996 Jun;126(6):1534-40. **Dietary (n-9) eicosatrienoic acid from a
cultured fungus inhibits leukotriene B4 synthesis in rats and the effect is
modified by dietary linoleic acid.** Cleland LG, Gibson RA, Neumann MA,
Hamazaki T, Akimoto K, James MJ.  
Br J Nutr. 2003 Oct;90(4):777-86 **. Fish-oil supplementation reduces
stimulation of plasma glucose fluxes during exercise in untrained males.**
Delarue J, Labarthe F, Cohen R.  
Int J Circumpolar Health. 2001 Apr;60(2):143-9. **Cod liver oil consumption,
smoking, and coronary heart disease mortality: three counties, Norway.**
Egeland GM, Meyer HE, Selmer R, Tverdal A, Vollset SE.  
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2000 Mar;62(3):201-7. **Effects of
n-3 fatty acids on growth and survival of J774 macrophages.** Fyfe DJ, Abbey
M.  
Eur J Clin Nutr. 2003 Jun;57(6):793-800. **Increased lipid peroxidation during
long-term intervention with high doses of n-3 fatty acids (PUFAs) following an
acute myocardial infarction.** Grundt H, Nilsen DW, Mansoor MA, Nordoy A.  
Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 1988 Dec;48(8):813-6. **Mechanisms for the serum
lipid-lowering effect of n-3 fatty acids.** Hagve TA, Christophersen BO.  
Am J Psychiatry. 2004 Mar;161(3):567-9. **Is low dietary intake of omega-3
fatty acids associated with depression?** Hakkarainen R, Partonen T, Haukka J,
Virtamo J, Albanes D, Lonnqvist J.  
J Neurosci Res 1988 Aug;20(4):451-6. **Role of arachidonic acid and other free
fatty acids in mitochondrial dysfunction in brain ischemia.** Hillered L, Chan
PH.  
J Neurosci Res 1989 Oct;24(2):247-50. **Brain mitochondrial swelling induced
by arachidonic acid and other long chain free fatty acids.** Hillered L, Chan
PH.  
Endocrinology. 2003 Sep;144(9):3958-68. **Diabetogenic impact of long-chain
omega-3 fatty acids on pancreatic beta-cell function and the regulation of
endogenous glucose production.** Holness MJ, Greenwood GK, Smith ND, Sugden
MC.  
Lipids. 1997 Jul;32(7):745-51. **Unusual effects of some vegetable oils on the
survival time of stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats.** Huang MZ,
Watanabe S, Kobayashi T, Nagatsu A, Sakakibara J, Okuyama H.  
Transplant Proc. 2001 Aug;33(5):2854-5. **Evaluation of the effect of fish oil
on cell kinetics: implications for clinical immunosuppression.** Istfan NW,
Khauli RB. Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts, USA. Cancer
Res. 1989 Apr 15;49(8):1931-6. **Effects of fish oil and corn oil diets on
prostaglandin-dependent and myelopoiesis-associated immune suppressor
mechanisms of mice bearing metastatic Lewis lung carcinoma tumors.** Young MR,
Young ME. Department of Research Services, Edward J. Hines, Jr. "The fish oil
diet increased the frequency of myeloid progenitor cells in normal mice and in
mice bearing small or large tumors. Concurrently, **the fish oil diet
stimulated the appearance of bone marrow-derived suppressor cells.** When
administered after the establishment of palpable primary tumors, a fish oil
diet also increased the formation of pulmonary lung nodules." "These data show
that a fish oil diet can minimize the immune suppression in tumor bearers when
suppression is mediated by PGE2-producing suppressor cells, but can also
**induce myelopoietic stimulation leading to the appearance of bone marrow-
derived suppressor cells and increased tumor metastasis."  
**J Exp Med 1993 Dec 1;178(6):2261-5. **Effect of dietary supplementation with
n-9 eicosatrienoic acid on leukotriene B4 synthesis in rats: a novel approach
to inhibition of eicosanoid synthesis.** James MJ, Gibson RA, Neumann MA,
Cleland LG  
Transplantation. 1989 Jul;48(1):98-102. **Enhancement of immunosuppression by
substitution of fish oil for olive oil as a vehicle for cyclosporine.** Kelley
VE, Kirkman RL, Bastos M, Barrett LV, Strom TB.  
Photochem Photobiol. 2004 May;79(5):470-5. **Mitochondria-derived reactive
oxygen species mediate blue light-induced death of retinal pigment epithelial
cells.** King A, Gottlieb E, Brooks DG, Murphy MP, Dunaief JL.  
Metabolism. 1989 Mar;38(3):278-81. **The effect of fatty acids on the
vulnerability of lymphocytes to cortisol.** Klein A, Bruser B, Malkin A.  
Tumour Biol. 1989;10(3):149-52. **Albumin and the unique pattern of inhibitors
of cortisol catabolism by lymphocytes in serum of cancer patients.** Klein A,
Bruser B, Malkin A.  
J Endocrinol. 1987 Feb;112(2):259-64. **Effect of a non-viral fraction of
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome plasma on the vulnerability of lymphocytes
to cortisol.** Klein A, Bruser B, Robinson JB, Pinkerton PH, Malkin A.  
Biochem Cell Biol. 1990 Apr;68(4):810-3. **Cortisol catabolism by lymphocytes
of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.** Klein A, Lishner M, Bruser B,
Curtis JE, Amato DJ, Malkin A.  
Clin Exp Metastasis 2000;18(5):371-7. **Promotion of colon cancer metastases
in rat liver by fish oil diet is not due to reduced stroma formation.**
Klieveri L, Fehres O, Griffini P, Van Noorden CJ, Frederiks WM.  
Free Radic Biol Med. 2000 Oct 15;29(8):714-20. **Acrolein, a product of lipid
peroxidation, inhibits glucose and glutamate uptake in primary neuronal
cultures.** Lovell MA, Xie C, Markesbery WR.  
Clin Exp Metastasis 1998 Jul;16(5):407-14. **Diminution of the development of
experimental metastases produced by murine metastatic lines in essential fatty
acid-deficient host mice.** Mannini A, Calorini L, Mugnai G, Ruggieri S.  
Lipids. 1998 Jul;33(7):655-61. **Free fatty acid fractions from some vegetable
oils exhibit reduced survival time-shortening activity in stroke-prone
spontaneously hypertensive rats.** Miyazaki M, Huang MZ, Takemura N, Watanabe
S, Okuyama H.  
J Physiol. 1994 Feb 15;475(1):83-93. **Facilitatory effect of docosahexaenoic
acid on N-methyl-D-aspartate response in pyramidal neurones of rat cerebral
cortex.** Nishikawa M, Kimura S, Akaike N.  
Antioxid Redox Signal. 1999 Fall;1(3):255-84.  
**4-Hydroxynonenal as a biological signal: molecular basis and
pathophysiological implications.** Parola M, Bellomo G, Robino G, Barrera G,
Dianzani MU.  
Neurochem Res. 1991 Sep;16(9):983-9. **Release of arachidonic acid by NMDA-
receptor activation in the rat hippocampus.** Pellerin L, Wolfe LS.  
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Feb 14;1535(2):145-52. **Acrolein inhibits
respiration in isolated brain mitochondria.** Picklo MJ, Montine TJ.  
Neurochem Res. 1994 Jan;19(1):57-63. **Inhibition of bioenergetics alters
intracellular calcium, membrane composition, and fluidity in a neuronal cell
line.** Ray P, Ray R, Broomfield CA, Berman JD.  
Neurobiol Aging. 2005 Apr;26(4):465-74. **Immunochemical crossreactivity of
antibodies specific for "advanced glycation endproducts" with "advanced
lipoxidation endproducts".** Richter T, Munch G, Luth HJ, Arendt T, Kientsch-
Engel R, Stahl P, Fengler D, Kuhla B.  
Food Chem Toxicol. 1998 Aug;36(8):663-72. **The association of increasing
dietary concentrations of fish oil with hepatotoxic effects and a higher
degree of aorta atherosclerosis in the ad lib.-fed rabbit.** Ritskes-Hoitinga
J, Verschuren PM, Meijer GW, Wiersma A, van de Kooij AJ, Timmer WG, Blonk CG,
Weststrate JA.  
Atherosclerosis. 2001 Mar;155(1):9-18. **Enhanced level of n-3 fatty acid in
membrane phospholipids induces lipid peroxidation in rats fed dietary
docosahexaenoic acid oil.** Song JH, Miyazawa T.  
Neurochem Res. 1995 Dec;20(12):1417-27. **Free radical-induced endothelial
membrane dysfunction at the site of blood-brain barrier: relationship between
lipid peroxidation, Na,K-ATPase activity, and 51Cr release.** Stanimirovic DB,
Wong J, Ball R, Durkin JP.  
Atherosclerosis, November 1997, vol. 135, no. 1, pp. 1-7(7 **) Oxidized
Cholesterol in the Diet Accelerates the Development of Atherosclerosis in LDL
Receptor and Apolipoprotein EDeficient Mice** _._ Staprans, I; Pan, X-M; Rapp,
JH; Grunfeld, C; Feingold, KR.  
J Neurosci Res. 2001 Sep 15;65(6):565-72. **Involvement of the 5-lipoxygenase
pathway in the neurotoxicity of the prion peptide PrP106-126.** Stewart LR,
White AR, Jobling MF, Needham BE, Maher F, Thyer J, Beyreuther K, Masters CL,
Collins SJ, Cappai R.  
J Nutr. 2003 Feb;133(2):496-503. **(n-3) Polyunsaturated fatty acids promote
activation-induced cell death in murine T lymphocytes.** Switzer KC, McMurray
DN, Morris JS, Chapkin RS.  
Arch Biochem Biophys. 1995 Oct 20;323(1):97-107. **Effect of linoleic acid
hydroperoxide on endothelial cell calcium homeostasis and phospholipid
hydrolysis.** Sweetman LL, Zhang NY, Peterson H, Gopalakrishna R, Sevanian A.  
Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1997 Dec;61(12):2085-8. **Oxidative stability of
docosahexaenoic acid-containing oils in the form of phospholipids,
triacylglycerols, and ethyl esters.** Song JH, Inoue Y, Miyazawa T.  
J Nutr. 2000 Dec;130(12):3028-33. **Polyunsaturated (n-3) fatty acids
susceptible to peroxidation are increased in plasma and tissue lipids of rats
fed docosahexaenoic acid-containing oils.** Song JH, Fujimoto K, Miyazawa T.  
Atherosclerosis. 2001 Mar;155(1):9-18. **Enhanced level of n-3 fatty acid in
membrane phospholipids induces lipid peroxidation in rats fed dietary
docosahexaenoic acid oil.** Song JH, Miyazawa T.  
Clin Exp Allergy. 2004 Feb;34(2):194-200. **Maternal breast milk long-chain
n-3 fatty acids are associated with increased risk of atopy in breastfed
infants.** Stoney RM, Woods RK, Hosking CS, Hill DJ, Abramson MJ, Thien FC.  
Free Radic Res. 2001 Apr;34(4):427-35. **Docosahexaenoic acid supplementation-
increased oxidative damage in bone marrow DNA in aged rats and its relation to
antioxidant vitamins.** Umegaki K, Hashimoto M, Yamasaki H, Fujii Y, Yoshimura
M, Sugisawa A, Shinozuka K.  
J Neurochem 1986 Oct;47(4):1181-9. **Effects of arachidonic acid on glutamate
and gamma-aminobutyric acid uptake in primary cultures of rat cerebral
cortical astrocytes and neurons.** Yu AC, Chan PH, Fishman RA.  

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2007. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

