![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Gelatin, stress, longevity**  

============================

**The main bulk of an animal's body consists of water, protein, fat and bones.
Fat tissue and bone are metabolically more quiescent than the protein-water
systems. During stress or starvation, or even hibernation, animals lose lean
mass faster than fat.**

**The amino acids that constitute protein have many hormone-like functions in
their free state. When our glucose (glycogen) stores have been depleted, we
convert our own tissue into free amino acids, some of which are used to
produce new glucose. The amino acids cysteine and tryptophan, released in
large quantities during stress, have antimetabolic (thyroid-suppressing) and,
eventually, toxic effects. Hypothyroidism itself increases the catabolic
turnover of protein, even though general metabolism is slowed.**

**Other amino acids act as nerve-modifiers (transmitters), causing, for
example, excitation or inhibition.**

**Some of these amino acids, such as glycine, have a very broad range of cell-
protective actions.**

**Their physical properties, rather than their use for production of energy or
other metabolic function, are responsible for their important cytoprotective
actions.**

**Gelatin (the cooked form of collagen) makes up about 50% of the protein in
an animal, but a much smaller percentage in the more active tissues, such as
brain, muscle, and liver. 35% of the amino acids in gelatin are glycine, 11%
alanine, and 21% proline and hydroxyproline.**

**In the industrialized societies, the consumption of gelatin has decreased,
relative to the foods that contain an inappropriately high proportion of the
antimetabolic amino acids, especially tryptophan and cysteine.**

**The degenerative and inflammatory diseases can often be corrected by the use
of gelatin-rich foods.**

============================  

I usually think about something for a long time before I get around to
integrating it into my life, sometimes because old habits have to be changed,
but usually because our social organization is set up to do things in
conventional ways. Our foods reflect our social organization, enforced by laws
and rules. When I first went to Mexico to study, many traditional foods were
still available even in the city--fried pig skin, served crisp or boiled with
a sauce, blood tacos, cartilaginous parts of various animals, chicken-foot
soup, crustaceans, insects, etc. Later, when I studied biochemistry, I
realized that each part of an organism has a characteristic chemistry and
special nutritional value. I knew of Weston Price's research on traditional
diets, and his argument that the degenerative diseases of civilization were
produced by the simplified diets that are characteristic of the highly
industrialized societies.

As I began to study endocrinology, I realized that there were some radical
misconceptions behind the ideas of scientific nutrition. I. P. Pavlov, who
had studied nutritional physiology because it constituted the animal's closest
interactions with its environment, was motivated by a desire to understand
life in its totality, including consciousness. But western nutritionists were
nearly all committed to an ideology that forced them to think in terms of
essential factors for growth, leading to ideas such as minimum daily
requirement for each nutrient. Bodily bulk (especially body length) was the
criterion, not the experienced quality of life. And there has been no scarcity
of evidence showing that rapid bodily growth has its drawbacks (e.g., Miller,
et al., 2002, Big mice die young).

One of the brightest of the genetically oriented nutritionists, Roger
Williams, used the idea of genetic individuality to explain that the popular
idea of a species-wide standard diet couldn't be applied to exceptional
individuals, and that disease was often the result of the mismatch between
special nutritional requirements and a standard diet. Linus Pauling's
concept of orthomolecular medicine was a restatement of Williams' principle
for the general scientific community.

But still, the emphasis was on the match between a specific chemical and the
**_genetic constitution_** of the organism. Pavlov's idea of the trophic
actions of nerves was discarded, and the rest of his work was relegated to a
crudely caricatured branch of psychology. His therapeutic recommendation of
beef broth for many ailments was ignored as having nothing to do with the
caricatured Pavlovism.

If nerves are intimately involved in the processes of nutrition and
development, the effects of nutrients on the nerves and their development
should have a central place in nutritional research. Our appetites reflect our
biochemical needs, and our unconditional reflexes are likely to be wiser
than the theories that are based simply on the amount of weight a young animal
gains on a particular diet.

When I began teaching endocrinology, some of my students didn't want to hear
about anything except lock and key endocrinology, in which a hormone
signals certain cells that have a suitable receptor for that hormone. But the
studies of Hans Selye and Albert Szent-Gyorgyi made it clear that Pavlov's
global, holistic approach to the organism in its environment was the soundest
scientific basis for physiology, including endocrinology. A cell's response to
a hormone depended on the state of the cell. Nutrients and metabolites and
hormones and neurotransmitters all modify the cell's sensitivity to its
surroundings. The assumptions of molecular biology, as generally understood,
are fundamentally mistaken.

The idea of fixed requirements for specific nutrients, and especially the idea
that rapid physical growth was the way to determine the essentiality of a
substance, led to a monstrous distortion of the official dietary
recommendations. Business, industry, government, and the health professions
collaborated in the propagation of an ideology about nutrition that
misrepresented the nature of the living organism.

Most studies of the nutritional requirements for protein have been done for
the agricultural industries, and so have been designed to find the cheapest
way to get the maximum growth in the shortest time. The industry isn't
interested in the longevity, intelligence, or happiness of their pigs,
chickens, and lambs. The industry has used chemical growth stimulants in
combination with the foods that support rapid growth at least expense.
Antibiotics and arsenic and polyunsaturated fatty acids have become part of
our national food supply because they produce rapid weight gain in young
animals.

The amino acids in proteins have been defined as essential on the basis of
their contribution to growth, ignoring their role in producing long life, good
brain development, and good health. The amino acid and protein requirements
during aging have hardly been studied, except in rats, whose short life-span
makes such studies fairly easy. The few studies that have been done indicate
that the requirements for tryptophan and cysteine become very low in
adulthood.

Although Clive McKay's studies of life extension through caloric restriction
were done in the 1930s, only a few studies have been done to find out which
nutrients' restriction contributes most to extending the life span.
Restricting toxic heavy metals, without restricting calories, produces about
the same life-extending effect as caloric restriction. **Restricting only
tryptophan, or only cysteine, produces a greater extension of the life span
than achieved in most of the studies of caloric restriction.** How great would
be the life-span extension if both tryptophan and cysteine were restricted at
the same time?

Both tryptophan and cysteine inhibit thyroid function and mitochondrial energy
production, and have other effects that decrease the ability to withstand
stress. Tryptophan is the precursor to serotonin, which causes inflammation,
immunodepression, and generally the same changes seen in aging. Histidine is
another amino acid precursor to a mediator of inflammation, histamine **;**
would the restriction of histidine in the diet have a longevity promoting
effect, too?

It happens that gelatin is a protein which contains no tryptophan, and only
small amounts of cysteine, methionine, and histidine. Using gelatin as a major
dietary protein is an easy way to restrict the amino acids that are associated
with many of the problems of aging.

The main amino acids in gelatin are glycine and proline **;** alanine is also
present in significant quantity. Glycine and proline are responsible for the
unusual fibrous property of collagen.

An animal's body, apart from fat and water, is mostly protein, and about half
of the protein in the body is collagen (which is the native, uncooked form of
gelatin). Its name is derived from its traditional use as glue. It is
responsible for the structural toughness of mature animal bodies.

When cells are stressed, they form extra collagen, but they can also dissolve
it, to allow for tissue remodeling and growth. Invasive cancers over-produce
this kind of enzyme, destroying the extracellular matrix which is needed for
normal cellular differentiation and function. When collagen is broken down, it
releases factors that promote wound healing and suppress tumor invasiveness.
(Pasco, et al., 2003) Glycine itself is one of the factors promoting wound
healing and tumor inhibition.

It has a wide range of antitumor actions, including the inhibition of new
blood vessel formation (angiogenesis), and it has shown protective activity in
liver cancer and melanoma. Since glycine is non-toxic (if the kidneys are
working, since any amino acid will contribute to the production of ammonia),
this kind of chemotherapy can be pleasant.

When we eat animal proteins in the traditional ways (for example, eating fish
head soup, as well as the muscles, or head-cheese as well as pork chops, and
chicken-foot soup as well as drumsticks), we assimilate a large amount of
glycine and gelatin. This whole-animal balance of amino acids supports all
sorts of biological process, including a balanced growth of children's tissues
and organs.

When only the muscle meats are eaten, the amino acid balance entering our
blood stream is the same as that produced by extreme stress, when cortisol
excess causes our muscles to be broken down to provide energy and material for
repair. The formation of serotonin is increased by the excess tryptophan in
muscle, and serotonin stimulates the formation of more cortisol, while the
tryptophan itself, along with the excess muscle-derived cysteine, suppresses
the thyroid function.

A generous supply of glycine/gelatin, against a balanced background of amino
acids, has a great variety of antistress actions. Glycine is recognized as an
inhibitory neurotransmitter, and promotes natural sleep. Used as a
supplement, it has helped to promote recovery from strokes and seizures, and
to improve learning and memory. But in every type of cell, it apparently has
the same kind of quieting, protective antistress action. The range of injuries
produced by an excess of tryptophan and serotonin seems to be prevented or
corrected by a generous supply of glycine. Fibrosis, free radical damage,
inflammation, cell death from ATP depletion or calcium overload, mitochondrial
damage, diabetes, etc., can be prevented or alleviated by glycine.

Some types of cell damage are prevented almost as well by alanine and proline
as by glycine, so the use of gelatin, rather than glycine, is preferable,
especially when the gelatin is associated with its normal biochemicals. For
example, skin is a rich source of steroid hormones, and cartilage contains
Mead acid, which is itself antiinflammatory.

The other well-studied inhibitory neurotransmitter is GABA, so it's
significant that GABA (gamma amino butyric acid) is a close analog of glycine
(alpha amino acetic acid). A synthetic molecule structurally similar to those
natural inhibitory transmitters, beta amino propanoic acid, has some of the
protective effects of glycine and GABA. The other molecules in the series, at
least up to epsilon amino caproic acid, have some of the same antiinvasive,
antiinflammatory, anti-angiogenic, properties. Alanine and proline, with cell-
protecting actions, have the same basic composition, carbon (CH2 or CH) atoms
separating acid and amino groups. Even the amino acids in which the lipophilic
carbon atoms extend out in a branched side-chain, valine, leucine, and
isoleucine, have some of the antiseizure (inhibitory) action (Skeie, et al.,
1992, 1994) of GABA and glycine. Tests done with one, or a few, of the
relatively lipophilic (aliphatic) amino acids prevent seizures, while the
balanced mixtures of amino acids permit seizures **;** unfortunately,
results of this sort haven't led researchers to question the idea of balance
that developed within the setting of agricultural research.

The similarity between the structures and actions of glycine and GABA suggest
that their receptors are similar, if not identical. For years, it has been
known that progesterone and pregnenolone act on the GABA receptor, to
reinforce the protective, inhibitory effects of GABA. Estrogen has the
opposite effect, inhibiting GABA's action. Since GABA opposes estrogen and
inhibits the growth of breast cancer, it wouldn't be surprising if glycine,
alanine, etc., did the same.

Recent research shows that progesterone and its metabolites also act on the
glycine receptor, increasing inhibition, and that the phytoestrogen,
genistein, antagonizes the inhibitory effect of glycine.

The inhibitory systems are opposed by excitatory systems, especially by the
excitatory amino acid system, activated by glutamic and aspartic acid.
Progesterone and estrogen act on that system, too, decreasing and increasing
excitation, respectively.

I have previously discussed the arguments for viewing progesterone as a
cardinal adsorbent (as in Ling and Fu, 1987, 1988, Ling, et al., 1984, a
steroid alters glycine's influence on the cell's electrical behavior) which
increases the lipophilic, fat-loving property of the cytoplasm, and estrogen
as having the opposite action, increasing the water-loving hydrophilic quality
of the cytoplasm. If we think of the proteins known as the GABA and glycine
receptors as having some regions in which the basic amine of lysine associates
with the acidic group of aspartic or glutamic acid, then the action of
glycine, or other amino acids would be to introduce additional lipophilic
carbon atoms into those regions (with the amino acids' polar ends pairing with
their opposites on the protein), where the cardinal adsorbents exert their
influence.

Generally, biologists seem puzzled by such facts, because they don't fit into
the lock and key model of molecular biology. But I think they make the
organism easier to understand, since these constellations of facts illustrate
simple and general physical principles. They suggest the idea that estrogen
and progesterone and glycine, GABA, etc., will be active in any functioning
cell, at a suitable concentration. It was this kind of thinking in terms of
general physical principles that led Szent-Gyorgyi to investigate the effects
of estrogen and progesterone on heart physiology. The old characterization of
estrogen and progesterone as sex and pregnancy hormones acting on a few
tissues through specific receptors never had a good basis in evidence, but the
accumulated evidence has now made those ideas impossible for an informed
person to accept. (Progesterone increases the heart's pumping efficiency, and
estrogen is antagonistic, and can produce cardiac arrhythmia.)

In the context of the excitatory actions of estrogen, and the inhibitory
action of glycine, it would be reasonable to think of glycine as one of the
antiestrogenic substances. Another type of amino acid, taurine, is
structurally similar to glycine (and to beta amino propanoic acid, and to
GABA), and it can be thought of as antiestrogenic in this context. The
specific kinds of excitation produced by estrogen that relate to reproduction
occur against a background of very generalized cellular excitation, that
includes increased sensitivity of sensory nerves, increased activity of motor
nerves, changes in the EEG, and, if the estrogen effect is very high,
epilepsy, tetany, or psychosis.

Glycine's inhibitory effects appear to oppose estrogen's actions generally, in
sensory and motor nerves, in regulating angiogenesis, and in modulating the
cytokines and "chemokines" that are involved in so many inflammatory and
degenerative diseases, especially tumor necrosis factor (TNF), nitric oxide
(NO), and prostaglandins. Exposure to estrogen early in life can affect the
health in adulthood, and so can an early deficiency of glycine. The
degenerative diseases can begin in the earliest years of life, but because
aging, like growth, is a developmental process, it's never too late to start
the corrective process.

One of estrogen's excitatory effects is to cause lipolysis, the release of
fatty acids from storage fat **;** it directs the conversion of glucose into
fat in the liver, so that the free fatty acids in the circulation remain
chronically high under its influence. The free fatty acids inhibit the
oxidation of glucose for energy, creating insulin resistance, the condition
that normally increases with aging, and that can lead to hyperglycemia and
diabetes.

Gelatin and glycine have recently been reported to facilitate the action of
insulin in lowering blood sugar and alleviating diabetes. Gelatin has been
used successfully to treat diabetes for over 100 years (A. Guerard, Ann
Hygiene 36, 5, 1871; H. Brat, Deut. Med. Wochenschrift 28 (No. 2), 21, 1902).
Glycine inhibits lipolysis (another antiexcitatory, antiestrogenic effect),
and this in itself will make insulin more effective, and help to prevent
hyperglycemia. (A gelatin-rich diet can also lower the serum triglycerides.)
Since persistent lipolysis and insulin resistance, along with a generalized
inflammatory state, are involved in a great variety of diseases, especially in
the degenerative diseases, it's reasonable to consider using glycine/gelatin
for almost any chronic problem. (Chicken foot soup has been used in several
cultures for a variety of ailments; chicken foot powder has been advocated as
a stimulant for spinal cord regeneration--Harry Robertson's method was stopped
by the FDA).

Although Hans Selye observed as early as the 1930s that stress causes internal
bleeding (in lungs, adrenals, thymus, intestine, salivary and tear glands,
etc.), the medical establishment, which has the opportunity to see it after
surgery, burns or other trauma, and following strokes and head injuries,
prefers to explain it by "stomach hyperacidity," as if it were limited to the
stomach and duodenum. And the spontaneous bruising, and easy bruising, that is
experienced by millions of women, especially with the premenstrual syndrome,
and nose bleeds, and scleral bleeding, purpura senilis, urinary bleeding,
bleeding gums, and many other kinds of "spontaneous" or stress related
bleeding, are treated by main-line medicine as if they had no particular
physiological significance.

Stress is an energy problem, that leads to the series of hormonal and
metabolic reactions that I have often written about--lipolysis, glycolysis,
increased serotonin, cortisol, estrogen, prolactin, leaky capillaries, protein
catabolism, etc. The capillaries are among the first tissues to be damaged by
stress.

Although Selye showed that estrogen treatment mimics shock and stress, and
that progesterone prevents the stress reaction, the effects of these hormones
on the circulatory system have never been treated systematically. Katherina
Dalton observed that progesterone treatment prevented the spontaneous bruising
of the premenstrual syndrome **;** Soderwall observed that estrogen caused
enlargement of the adrenals, sometimes with hemorrhage and necrosis **;** old
female animals often have bleeding in the adrenals (Dhom, et al., 1981).
Strangely, estrogen's induction of uterine bleeding has been
compartmentalized, as if the endometrial blood vessels didn't follow the same
rules as vessels elsewhere in the body. Both estrogen and cortisol are known
to cause clotting disorders and to increase capillary fragility, but these
steroids have been elevated to the realm of billion dollar drug products,
beyond the reach of ordinary physiological thinking. Other stress-released
substances that are entangled in the drug market (tryptophan, serotonin,
nitric oxide, and unsaturated fats, for example) are similarly exempt from
consideration as factors in circulatory, neoplastic, and degenerative
diseases.

At the time Selye was observing stress-induced bleeding, standard medicine was
putting gelatin to use--orally, subcutaneously, and intravenously--to control
bleeding. Since ancient times, it had been used to stop bleeding by applying
it to wounds, and this had finally been incorporated into medical practice.

The 1936 Cyclopedia of Medicine (G.M. Piersol, editor, volume 6) mentions the
use of gelatin solution to quickly control nosebleeds, excessive menstrual
bleeding, bleeding ulcers (using three doses of 18 grams as a 10% solution
during one day), and bleeding from hemorrhoids and the lower bowel, and
hemorrhage from the bladder. But since Selye's work relating the
thrombohemorrhagic syndromes to stress wasn't known at that time, gelatin was
thought of as a useful drug, rather than as having potentially far-reaching
physiological effects, antagonizing some of the agents of stress-induced
tissue damage.

Skin cells and nerve cells and many other cells are electrically stabilized
by glycine, and this effect is currently being described in terms of a
chloride current. A variety of mechanisms have been proposed for the
protective effects of some of the amino acids, based on their use as energy or
for other metabolic purpose, but there is evidence that glycine and alanine
act protectively without being metabolized, simply by their physical
properties.

A small dose of glycine taken shortly after suffering a stroke was found to
accelerate recovery, preventing the spreading of injury through its inhibitory
and antiinflammatory actions. Its nerve-stabilizing action, increasing the
amount of stimulation required to activate nerves, is protective in epilepsy,
too. This effect is important in the regulation of sleep, breathing, and heart
rhythm.

Glycine's antispastic activity has been used to alleviate the muscle spasms of
multiple sclerosis. It is thought to moderate some of the symptoms of
schizophrenia.

A recent publication shows that glycine alleviates colitis; but the use of
gelatin, especially in the form of a concentrated gelatinous beef broth, for
colitis, dysentery, ulcers, celiac disease, and other diseases of the
digestive system, goes far back in medical history. Pavlov's observation of
its effectiveness in stimulating the secretion of digestive juices occurred
because the stimulating value of broth was already recognized.

Although I pointed out a long time ago the antithyroid effects of excessive
cysteine and tryptophan from eating only the muscle meats, and have been
recommending gelatinous broth at bedtime to stop nocturnal stress, it took me
many years to begin to experiment with large amounts of gelatin in my diet.
Focusing on the various toxic effects of tryptophan and cysteine, I decided
that using commercial gelatin, instead of broth, would be helpful for the
experiment. For years I hadn't slept through a whole night without waking, and
I was in the habit of having some juice or a little thyroid to help me go back
to sleep. The first time I had several grams of gelatin just before bedtime, I
slept without interruption for about 9 hours. I mentioned this effect to some
friends, and later they told me that friends and relatives of theirs had
recovered from long-standing pain problems (arthritic and rheumatic and
possibly neurological) in just a few days after taking 10 or 15 grams of
gelatin each day.

For a long time, gelatin's therapeutic effect in arthritis was assumed to
result from its use in repairing the cartilage or other connective tissues
around joints, simply because those tissues contain so much collagen.
(Marketers suggest that eating cartilage or gelatin will build cartilage or
other collagenous tissue.) Some of the consumed gelatin does get incorporated
into the joint cartilage, but that is a slow process, and the relief of pain
and inflammation is likely to be almost immediate, resembling the
antiinflammatory effect of cortisol or aspirin.

Inflammation produces fibrosis, because stress, hypoxia, and inadequate supply
of glucose stimulate the fibroblasts to produce increased amounts of collagen.
In lungs, kidneys, liver, and other tissues, glycine protects against
fibrosis, the opposite of what the traditional view would suggest.

Since excess tryptophan is known to produce muscle pain, myositis, even
muscular dystrophy, gelatin is an appropriate food for helping to correct
those problems, simply because of its lack of tryptophan. (Again, the popular
nutritional idea of amino acids as simply building blocks for tissues is
exactly wrong--muscle protein can exacerbate muscle disease.) All of the
conditions involving excess prolactin, serotonin, and cortisol (autism,
postpartum and premenstrual problems, Cushing's disease, "diabetes,"
impotence, etc.) should benefit from reduced consumption of tryptophan. But
the specifically antiinflammatory amino acids in gelatin also antagonize the
excitatory effects of the tryptophan-serotonin-estrogen- prolactin system.

In some of the older studies, therapeutic results improved when the daily
gelatin was increased. Since 30 grams of glycine was commonly used for
treating muscular dystrophy and myasthenia gravis, a daily intake of 100 grams
of gelatin wouldn't seem unreasonable, and some people find that quantities in
that range help to decrease fatigue. For a growing child, though, such a large
amount of refined gelatin would tend to displace other important foods. The
National Academy of Sciences recently reviewed the requirements for working
adults (male and female soldiers, in particular), and suggested that 100 grams
of balanced protein was needed for efficient work. For adults, a large part of
that could be in the form of gelatin.

If a person eats a large serving of meat, it's probably helpful to have 5 or
10 grams of gelatin at approximately the same time, so that the amino acids
enter the blood stream in balance.

Asian grocery stores are likely to sell some of the traditional gelatin-rich
foods, such as prepared pig skin and ears and tails, and chicken feet.

Although the prepared powdered gelatin doesn't require any cooking, dissolving
it in hot water makes it digest a little more quickly. It can be incorporated
into custards, mousses, ice cream, soups, sauces, cheese cake, pies, etc., or
mixed with fruit juices to make desserts or (with juice concentrate) candies.

Although pure glycine has its place as a useful and remarkably safe drug, it
shouldn't be thought of as a food, because manufactured products are always
likely to contain peculiar contaminants.

****

**REFERENCES**  

Am J Physiol. 1990 Jul;259(1 Pt 2):F80-7. **Mechanisms of perfused kidney
cytoprotection by alanine and glycine.** Baines AD, Shaikh N, Ho P.

Neurol. 1974; 24:392. **Preliminary study of glycine administration in
patients with spasticity.** Barbeau A.

Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1981;36(2-3):195-206. **Peliosis
of the female adrenal cortex of the aging rat.** Dhom G, Hohbach C, Mausle E,
Scherr O, Uebergerg H. Foci of apparent peliosis are regularly observed in the
mid-zone of the adrenal cortex in female rats older than 600 days. The changes
present range from ectasis of the sinusoids to extensive cystic change of the
whole organ. **This lesion occurs almost exclusively in female animals and was
seen in only one of 50 male animals older than 600 days examined.**
Experimental stimulation or inhibition did not influence adrenal peliosis.
Electron microscopically, there was marked pericapillary edema with collapse
of the capillaries, and erythrocytes and thrombocytes were seen infiltrating
the edema. Fibrin accumulated in the larger foci. Degenerative alterations
were not observed either in the epithelial cells of the cortex or in
mesenchymal cells. The pathogenesis is unknown, but the possible role of
**constant estrus in aging female rats will be discussed.**

Riv Neurol. 1976 Mar-Jun;46(3):254-61. **[Antagonism between focal epilepsy
and taurine administered by cortical Perfusion]** Durelli L, Quattrocolo G,
Buffa C, Valentini C, Mutani R. The therapeutic action of taurine cortical
perfusion was tested in cats affected with Premarin and cobalt cortical
epileptogenic foci. In all animals taurine provoked the disappearance of EEG
epileptic abnormalities. In the case of Premarin focus the effect appeared
more quickly than in the cobalt one. This different time-course, according to
previous reports on the antiepileptic action of the parenteral administration
of the amino acid, **suggests the hypothesis of a taurine direct inhibitory
action against Premarin focus** and, on the contrary, a mediated action
towards the cobalt's. The latter might be related to the metabolic production
of some taurine derivative.

Ann Neurol. 1998; 44:261-265. **Beneficial effects of L-serine and glycine in
the management of seizures in 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency.**
de Kooning JT, Duran M, Dorling L, et al.

Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1999; 56:29-36. **Efficacy of high-dose glycine in the
treatment of enduring negative symptoms of schizophrenia.** Heresco-Levy U,
Javitt DC, Ermilov M, et al.

Free Radic Biol Med. 2001 Nov 15;31(10):1236-44. **Dietary glycine inhibits
activation of nuclear factor kappa B and prevents liver injury in hemorrhagic
shock in the rat.** Mauriz JL, Matilla B, Culebras JM, Gonzalez P, Gonzalez-
Gallego J. "Feeding the rats glycine significantly reduced mortality, the
elevation of plasma **** transaminase levels and hepatic necrosis. **The
increase in plasma TNFalpha and nitric oxide (NO) was also blunted by glycine
feeding."**

Am Fam Phys 1979 May;19(5):77-86. **'Not Cushing's syndrome'.** Rincon J,
Greenblatt RB, Schwartz RP Cushing's syndrome is characterized by protein
wasting secondary to hypergluconeogenesis, which produces thin skin, poor
muscle tone, osteoporosis and **capillary fragility.** These features
distinguish patients with true Cushing's syndrome from those who have some of
the clinical findings often associated with the syndrome, such as obesity,
hypertension, striae and hirsutism. The dexamethasone suppression test helps
identify patients with pseudo-Cushing's syndrome.

Carcinogenesis. 1999; 20:2075-2081. **Dietary glycine prevents the development
of liver tumors caused by the peroxisome proliferator WY-14, 643**. Rose ML,
Cattley RC, Dunn C, et al.

Carcinogenesis, Vol. 20, No. 5, 793-798, May 1999. **Dietary glycine inhibits
the growth of B16 melanoma tumors in mice.** Rose M.L.,Madren J, Bunzendahl
H., and Thurman R.G. Dietary glycine inhibited hepatocyte proliferation in
response to the carcinogen WY-14,643. Since increased cell replication is
associated with hepatic cancer caused by WY-14,643, glycine may have anti-
cancer properties. Therefore, these experiments were designed to test the
hypothesis that dietary glycine would inhibit the growth of tumors arising
from B16 melanoma cells implanted subcutaneously in mice. C57BL/6 mice were
fed diet supplemented with 5% glycine and 15% casein or control diet (20%
casein) for 3 days prior to subcutaneous implantation of B16 tumor cells.
Weight gain did not differ between mice fed control and glycine-containing
diets. B16 tumors grew rapidly in mice fed control diet; however, in mice fed
glycine diet, tumor size was 50-75% less. At the time of death, tumors from
glycine-fed mice weighed nearly 65% less than tumors from mice fed control
diet (P < 0.05). Glycine (0.01-10 mM) did not effect growth rates of B16 cells
in vitro. Moreover, tumor volume and mitotic index of B16 tumors in vivo did
not differ 2 days after implantation when tumors were small enough to be
independent of vascularization. After 14 days, tumors from mice fed dietary
glycine had 70% fewer arteries (P < 0.05). Furthermore, glycine (0.01-10 mM)
inhibited the growth of endothelial cells in vitro in a dose-dependent manner
(P < 0.05; IC50 = 0.05 mM). These data support the hypothesis that dietary
glycine prevents tumor growth in vivo by inhibiting angiogenesis through
mechanisms involving inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation.

Carcinogenesis, Vol. 20, No. 11, 2075-2081, November 1999. **Dietary glycine
prevents the development of liver tumors caused by the peroxisome proliferator
WY-14,643.** M.L.Rose, R.C.Cattley1, C.Dunn, V.Wong, Xiang Li and R.G.Thurman.
Simpson RK Jr, Gondo M, Robertson CS, Goodman JC. **The influence of glycine
and related compounds on spinal cord injury-related spasticity.** Neurochem
Res. 1995; 20:1203-1210.

Neurochem Res. 1995 Oct;20(10):1203-10. **The influence of glycine and related
compounds on spinal cord injury-induced spasticity.** Simpson RK Jr, Gondo M,
Robertson CS, Goodman JC.

Neurochem Res. 1996 Oct;21(10):1221-6. **Reduction in the mechanonociceptive
response by intrathecal administration of glycine and related compounds.**
Simpson RK Jr, Gondo M, Robertson CS, Goodman JC.

Neurol Res. 1998 Mar;20(2):161-8. **Glycine receptor reduction within
segmental gray matter in a rat model in neuropathic pain.** Simpson RK Jr,
Huang W.

Neurol Res. 2000 Mar;22(2):160-4. **Long-term intrathecal administration of
glycine prevents mechanical hyperalgesia in a rat model of neuropathic pain.**
Huang W, Simpson RK.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1992 Nov;43(3):669-71. **Branched-chain amino acids
increase the seizure threshold to picrotoxin in rats.** Skeie B, Petersen AJ,
Manner T, Askanazi J, Jellum E, Steen PA.

Thromb Diath Haemorrh Suppl 1968;30:165-9 **[Purpura of the premenstrum and
climacteric].** [Article in German] **** Stamm H.

Toth E, Lajtha A. **Glycine potentiates the action of some anticonvulsant
drugs in some seizure models.** Neurochem Res. 1984; 9:1711-1718.

Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2000 Jul;31(3):231-3. **[The roles of estrogen and
progestin in epileptogenesis and their mechanisms of action]** [Article in
Chinese] Wang Q.

FASEB J. 2000; 14:476-484. **Glycine-gated channels in neutrophils attenuate
calcium influx and superoxide production.** Wheeler M, Stachlewitz RT,
Yamashina S, et al.

Cell Mol Life Sci.1999; 56:843-856. **Glycine: a new anti-inflammatory
immunonutrient.** Wheeler MD, Ikejema K, Mol Life Sci. Enomoto N, et al.

Nutr Cancer. 2001;40(2):197-204. **Endothelial cells contain a glycine-gated
chloride channel.** Yamashina S, Konno A, Wheeler MD, Rusyn I, Rusyn EV, Cox
AD, Thurman RG. " **Glycine inhibited growth of B16 melanoma tumors in vivo
most likely because of the inhibition of angiogenesis. Here, the hypothesis
that the anticancer effect of glycine in vivo is due to expression of a
glycine-gated Cl- channel in endothelial cells was tested.**

Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1981 Nov;92(11):599-601. **[Repair processes in wound
tissues of experimental animals following administration of glycine]**
[Article in Russian] Zaidenberg MA, Pisarzhevskii SA, Nosova IM, Kerova AN,
Dudnikova GN. A study was made of the effect of glycine given in doses
approximating the physiological ones on the repair of processes in rat wound
tissues. It was disclosed that in the early periods of wound healing, glycine
administration leads to the increased content of cAMP and cAMP/cGMP ratio in
the wound muscle and then in the granulation tissue, which appears to promote
the intensification of the repair processes manifesting in the changes in
tissue metabolism (DNA, collagen), in anti-inflammatory action, as well as in
a more rapid maturation of the granulation tissue and wound reduction.. It was
also found that the doses of glycine tested do not affect the content of
insulin and hydrocortisone in the blood of experimental animals.  

**In recent years, evidence has mounted in favor of the antiinflammatory,
immunomodulatory and cytoprotective effects of the simplest amino acid
L-glycine. Glycine protects against shock caused by hemorrhage, endotoxin
and sepsis, prevents ischemia/reperfusion and cold storage/reperfusion injury
to a variety of tissues and organs including liver, kidney, heart, intestine
and skeletal muscle, and diminishes liver and renal injury caused by hepatic
and renal toxicants and drugs. Glycine also protects against peptidoglycan
polysaccharide-induced arthritis... and inhibits gastric secretion ....and
protects the gastric mucosa against chemically and stress-induced ulcers.
Glycine appears to exert several protective effects, including
antiinflammatory, immunomodulatory and direct cytoprotective actions. Glycine
acts on inflammatory cells such as macrophages to suppress activation of
transcription factors and the formation of free radicals and inflammatory
cytokines. In the plasma membrane, glycine appears to activate a chloride
channel that stabilizes or hyperpolarizes the plasma membrane potential. As a
consequence, .... opening of ... calcium channels and the resulting increases
in intracellular calcium ions are suppressed, which may account for the
immunomodulatory and antiinflammatory effects of glycine. Lastly, glycine
blocks the opening of relatively non-specific pores in the plasma membrane
that occurs as the penultimate event leading to necrotic cell death.**

**** Zhong Z, Wheeler MD, Li X, Froh M, Schemmer P, Yin M, Bunzendaul H,
Bradford B, Lemasters JJ. **,** "L-Glycine: a novel antiinflammatory,
immunomodulatory, and cytoprotective agent." Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care.
2003 Mar;6(2):229-40.  
  
  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

