![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Genes, Carbon Dioxide and Adaptation**

_"Over the oxygen supply of the body carbon dioxide spreads its protecting
wings."  
\- Friedrich Miescher, Swiss physiologist, 1885_

To reach useful simplicities, we usually have to sift through the accumulated
rationalizations previous generations have produced to justify doing things
their way. If we could start with an accurate understanding of what life is,
and what we are doing here, science could be built up deductively as well as
by the accumulation of evidence. But the fact that we have grown up amid false
and unworkable models of what life is, means that we have to lean heavily on
evidence, building up new models inductively, imaginatively, and
scientifically. Textbooks and professional journals can be useful if they are
seen as monuments to past beliefs, and not as authorities to be accepted.
Examining the dogmatic models of life and the world in which life exists, we
can better understand the nature of the existing barriers to constructive
work.

The Central Dogma of the molecular geneticists, in their own words, was that
information flows only from DNA to RNA, and from RNA to protein, never in the
other direction. The Central Dogma was formulated to suppress forever the
Lamarckian idea of the inheritance of acquired characters, that Weismann's
amputation of the tails of a multitude of mice had attempted to deal with
earlier in the history of genetics.

The Central Dogma continues to be influential, even after a series of
revisions. Until the 1990s, the only "practical" fruit of genetics had been
genocide, but now it has become possible to insert genes into bacteria, and to
use the bacteria to produce industrial quantities of specific proteins. In
principle, that could be useful, although bovine growth hormone poses a threat
to the health of both people and cows, human growth hormone poses a threat to
athletes and old people, and human insulin could increase the number of
treated diabetics. A deranged culture will put anything cheap to bad use. The
ability to make organisms produce foreign proteins confirms that information
can flow from DNA to protein, but as that technology was being developed, the
discovery of retroviruses showed that the Central Dogma of molecular genetics
was wrong, RNA is a very significant template for the production of DNA. And
the scrapie prion shows that proteins can be infectious, passing along
information without nucleic acids as the agent of transmission. The directed
mutations demonstrated by John Cairns and others have thoroughly destroyed the
Central Dogma of molecular genetics, even as it applied to the simplest
organisms, but molecular genetics survives as an industrial and forensic
technology.

Although evidence suggests that about 2% of human diseases involve the
inheritance of an abnormal protein, the exact way the disease develops is
never as clear as the geneticists would imply. And the major diseases, cancer,
diabetes, heart disease, Alzheimer's, epilepsy, depression, etc., that are so
often blamed on "genes," are so poorly understood that it is arbitrary and
crazy to talk about the way genes "cause" them. People who had never had a
problem with diabetes in their culture, very soon suffered from the same rate
of diabetes as their neighbors when they immigrated into Israel and began
eating the European style diet. The interesting thing about the genetic
explanation for disease is how its proponents can believe what they are
saying. If you read Konrad Lorenz's writings on racial hygiene, you can
imagine that he might have really come to believe what he was saying, even if
it was an invention that earned him personal prestige and revenge against
people who were reluctant to accept his ideas of cultural excellence and
inferiority. When I listened to Gunther Stent praising the doctrine he had
taken straight from Konrad Lorenz's original genocide papers, I wondered how a
German who had escaped the holocaust with his Jewish family when he was nine
years old could talk about those doctrines without anger, and without pointing
out the purpose for which they had been created. In the audience, a professor
who had been a refugee from Hungary defended the doctrine, saying that a man
and his work have nothing to do with each other, though the whole content of
the doctrine was that a man and his work are identical, because his behavior
is determined by his genes. These were mature, internationally known
intellectuals, who made the most amazingly self-contradictory statements
without embarrassment, because they were committed, for some deep, mysterious
reason, to the doctrine of genetic determinism. If these refugees could
espouse the rationale for "racial hygiene" as their own, I suppose it isn't so
hard to understand that people can devote their life to studying the genetics
of diabetes, even though diabetes has appeared suddenly in one generation of
immigrants when their diet was suddenly changed, a massive fact that bluntly
contradicts the genetic doctrine. There is something very deep in our culture
that loves genetics.

One of the cultural trends that makes genetic determinism attractive is the
theory of radical individualism, something that has grown up with protestant
christianity, according to some historians. Roger Williams' work in nutrition
seemed to be powered by this idea of individual genetic uniqueness, and in his
case, the idea led him to some useful insights--he suggested that the
environment could be adjusted to suit the highly specific needs of the
individual. This idea led to the widespread belief that nutritional
supplements might be needed by a large part of the population. Extreme
nurturing of the deviant individual is the opposite extreme from the
Lorenzian-Hitlerian solution, of eliminating everyone who wasn't a perfect
Aryan specimen.

But Williams' genetic doctrine assumed that our nutritional needs were
primarily inborn, determined by our unique genes. However, there is a famous
experiment in which rats were made deficient in riboflavin, and when their
corneal tissue showed evidence of the vitamin deficiency, they were given a
standard diet. However, the standard diet no longer met the needs of their eye
tissue, and during the remainder of the observation period, only a dose of
riboflavin several times higher than normal would prevent the signs of
deficiency. A developmental change had taken place in the cornea, making its
vitamin B2 requirement abnormally high. If we accept the epigenetic,
developmental idea of metabolic requirements, our idea of nurturing
environmental support would consider the long-range effects of environmental
adequacy, and would consider that much disease could be prevented by prenatal
support, and by avoiding extreme deficiencies at any time. Williams himself
emphasized the importance of prenatal nutrition in disease prevention, so he
wasn't a genetic totalitarian; combining the idea of unique genetic
individuality with the recognition that malnutrition causes disease, led him
to believe in the necessity for nutitional adequacy, rather than to the
extermination of the sick, weak, or different individuals.

The idea of "genetic determinism" says that our traits are the result of the
specific proteins that are produced by our specific genes. The doctrine allows
for some gradations, such as "half a dose" of a trait, but in practice it
becomes a purely subjective accounting for everything in terms of mysterious
degrees of "penetrance" of genes, and interactions with unknown factors.
Proteins, that supposedly express our genetic constitution, include enzymes,
structural proteins, antibodies, and a variety of protein hormones and peptide
regulatory molecules. Every protein, including the smallest peptide (except
certain cyclic peptides), contains at least one amine group, and usually
several. Amine groups react spontaneously with carbon dioxide, to form
carbamino groups, and they can also react, nonenzymically, with sugars, in the
reaction called glycation or glycosylation. These chemical changes alter the
functions of the proteins, so that hormones and their "receptors," tubules and
filaments, enzymes and synthetic systems, all behave differently under their
influences. (The proteins' electrical charge, relationship to water and fats,
and shape, change quickly and reversibly as the concentration of carbon
dioxide changes; in the absence of carbon dioxide, these properties tend to
change irreversibly under the influence of metabolic stress.)

This is the clearest, and the most powerful, instance of metabolic influence
on biological structure. That makes it very remarkable that it has been the
subject of so few publications. I think the absence of discussion of this
fundamental biological principle can be understood only in relation to the
great importance it has for a new understanding of development and inheritance
--it is an easily documented process that will invalidate some of the most
deeply held beliefs of most of the people who are influential in science and
politics.

I will continue discussing some of these implications in newsletters on
imprinting, degenerative diseases, heart attacks, high blood pressure, and
other special biological questions, but I think the most important work that
remains to be done is to work out the exact mechanisms by which metabolic
energy, expressed largely by factors such as the ratio of carbon dioxide to
lactic acid, guides both development and evolution. These ideas will have to
take into account the actual resources of the world, as well as the internal
processes and resources of the organism. Each development in the organism,
whether it leads to maturation or to degeneration, consists of responses to
and interactions with specific environments.

Curiosity, esthetics, creativity, and stimulation are necessarily and deeply
linked to metabolic efficiency and structural-anatomical development. For
example, the known effects of stimulation and success (or isolation and
depression) on brain anatomy and function should be linked meaningfully with
metabolic, hormonal and dietary processes. There is a large amount of
information available that could be put to practical use, but there are still
important ideological barriers to be overcome. Marshalling the information
needed to optimize our own development runs counter to the program of our
technical-scientific culture, which prefers to believe that degeneration is
programmed, while emergent evolution is unforeseeable. But, if an optimization
project is presented as a way to forestall the "programmed degeneration," it
might succeed in becoming part of the culture.

Vernadsky's idea of the Noosphere differs from the Gaia hypothesis (that the
world is a self-regulating organism-like system) in the intrinsic
directionality of Vernadsky's Noosphere, which makes the course of human
society crucial for the fate of the planet. It proposes that planets, like
organisms, are going somewhere. The Gaia hypothesis is increasingly being
interpreted as a justification for feeling no responsibility for the effects
of technology on the environment, and some people are expressing that view of
the world as essentially a justification for any vandalism that may come
along. Kary Mullis, for example, says that mass extinctions of organisms have
occurred in the past, and so it's just natural for species to become extinct,
and it isn't appropriate to be concerned about the extinctions that are being
caused by civilization's technological depredations.

In the Noosphere, global warming and increased carbon dioxide would represent
an advance toward a higher state of "metabolism" of the world, and this would
support the emergence of new biological forms from those existing. But if
whole systems of life are destroyed before that happens, the biological
achievements of the past could be lost irretrievably; there is no guarantee
that the system will continue to work, if major sectors are deleted from the
interacting systems. Even in terms of the Gaia conception, that the earth is
like an organism, consider what the loss of genetic complexity means for an
organism. Sometimes, for example, things that happen to an individual lead to
sterility several generations later, although the procedure didn't seem lethal
for the individual or its immediate descendants.

The whole idea of "evolution" is that the past is preserved within the
present, or that the present is built upon the accomplishments of the past.
The idea that evolution has been "random," and that the world is simply self-
regulating, might seem liberating to those who hate the idea that they might
be intrinsically responsible for anything outside of themselves, but it is
liberating only in the way that a vandal's manifesto might be, declaring the
world to be their playground.

The problem with such a manifesto of irresponsibility is simply that it is
built upon the same system of cultural assumptions that produced Nazi
eugenics, and that those assumptions are false. The political assumptions of
the people who controlled scientific institutions were built into a set of
pseudo-scientific doctrines, which continue to be valued for their political
and philosophical implications.

For hundreds or thousands of years, the therapeutic value of carbonated
mineral springs has been known. The belief that it was the water's lively gas
content that made it therapeutic led Joseph Priestley to investigate ways to
make artificially carbonated water, and in the process he discovered oxygen.
Carbonated water had its medical vogue in the 19th century, but the modern
medical establishment has chosen to define itself in a way that glorifies
"dangerous," "powerful" treatments, and ridicules "natural" and mild
approaches. The motivation is obvious--to maintain a monopoly, there must be
some reason to exclude the general public from "the practice of medicine."
Witch doctors maintained their monopoly by working with frightening ghost-
powers, and modern medicine uses its technical mystifications to the same
purpose.vAlthough the medical profession hasn't lost its legal monopoly on
health care, corporate interests have come to control the way medicine is
practiced, and the way research is done in all the fields related to medicine.

The fact that carbon dioxide therapy is extremely safe has led to the official
doctrine that it can't be effective. The results reviewed by Yandell Henderson
in the Cyclopedia of Medicine in 1940 were so impressive that carbon dioxide
therapy would have been as commonly used and as well known as oxygen therapy,
radiation treatments, sulfa drugs, barbiturates, and digitalis, but it was
completely lacking in the thrilling mystique of those dangerous treatments.

Henderson assumed that carbon dioxide use was becoming a permanent part of
medicine, to be used with anesthesia to prevent cessation of spontaneous
breathing, during recovery from surgery to prevent shock and pneumonia, for
stimulating respiration in newborns, and for resuscitating drowning or
suffocation victims, as well as for treatment of heart disease and some
neurological conditions (see below). However, its use in surgery and
resuscitation has probably decreased since he wrote, despite occasional
publications pointing out the dangers involved in the use of oxygen without
carbon dioxide.

REFERENCES

 **O. Rahn, "Protozoa need carbon dioxide for growth," Growth 5, 197-199,
1941. "**

On page 113 of this volume, the statement of Valley and Rettger that all
bacteria need carbon dioxide for growth had been shown to apply to young as
well as old cells." "...it is possible...to remove it as rapidly as it is
produced, and under these circumstances, bacteria cannot multiply."

  

 **Y. Henderson, "Carbon Dioxide," Cyclopedia of Medicine, 1940. "**

Before considering these matters, it will be best that the mind be cleared of
certain deep rooted misconceptions that have long opposed the truth and
impeded its applications. It will be seen that carbon dioxide is truly the
breath of life."

"The human mind is inherently inclined to take a moralistic view of nature.
Prior to the modern scientific era, which only goes back a generation or two,
if indeed it can be said as yet even to have begun in popular thought, nearly
every problem was viewed as an alternative between good and evil,
righteousness and sin, God and the Devil. This superstitious slant still
distorts the conceptions of health and disease; indeed, it is mainly derived
from the experience of physical suffering. Lavoisier contributed
unintentionally to this conception when he defined the life supporting
character of oxygen and the suffocating power of carbon dioxide. Accordingly,
for more than a century after his death, and even now in the field of
respiration and related functions, oxygen typifies the Good and carbon dioxide
is still regarded as a spirit of Evil. There could scarcely be a greater
misconception of the true biological relations of these gases." "Carbon
dioxide is the chief hormone of the entire body; it is the only one that is
produced by every tissue and that probably acts on every organ. In the
regulation of the functions of the body, carbon dioxide exerts at least 3 well
defined influences: (1) It is one of the prime factors in the acid-base
balance of the blood. (2) It is the principal control of respiration. (3) It
exerts an essential tonic influence upon the heart and peripheral
circulation."

"A frog's muscle will contract effectively and repeatedly under suitable
stimulation in an atmosphere of pure nitrogen. In contraction, a muscle
produces lactic acid, partly by reconversion into sugar. In other words,
oxygen is not one of the primary factors in muscular work. The reserve store
of oxygen in the body is small. Vigorous breathing does not take place before
an exertion; the exertion is first made and then the oxygen needed to clear
the system in preparation for another exertion is absorbed. The demand for
oxygen for this scavenging of waste and restoration of power is termed by A.V.
Hill the "oxygen deficit" of exercise."

"On the other hand, present knowledge indicates that carbon dioxide is an
absolutely essential component of protoplasm. It is one of the factors in the
balance of alkali and acid for the maintenance of the normal pH of the
tissues. Acapnia, that is diminution of the normal content of carbon dioxide,
involves therefore, a disturbance of one of the fundamental conditions of
life."

"These observations upon the circulation showed also that in animals reduced
to a state of shock the carbon dioxide of the blood, or as it now be generally
termed, the "alkaline reserve," is greatly reduced. This experimental result
was later confirmed by the observations of Cannon upon wounded soldiers during
the war."

"Catatonia.---Finally, mention may be made of the extraordinary observations
reported by the late A.S. Lovenhart, in which he found that inhalation of
carbon dioxide to cases of catatonia induced a temporary restoration of
intelligence and mental responsiveness. The simplest explanation of the
results in these cases is attained by postulating an habitual contraction of
blood-vessels in the brain of the catatonic patient, similar to that in the
heart and limbs of the cases discussed in the previous section. If this view
is correct, the beneficial effects of the inhalation are due to improvement in
the circulation in the brain under the influence of carbon dioxide upon the
finer blood vessels."

 **Vojnosanit Pregl 1996 Jul-Aug;53(4):261-74. [Carbon dioxide inhibits the
generation of active forms of oxygen in human and animal cells and the
significance of the phenomenon in biology and medicine]. Boljevic S, Kogan AH,
Gracev SV, Jelisejeva SV, Daniljak IG**

Carbon dioxide (CO2) influence in generation of active oxygen forms (AOF) in
human mononuclear cells (blood phagocytes and alveolar macrophages) and animal
cells (tissue phagocytes, parenchymal and interstitial cells of liver, kidney,
lung, brain and stomach) was investigated. The AOF generation was examined by
the methods of chemiluminiscence (CL) using luminol, lucigenin and NBT (nitro
blue tetrazolium) reaction. It was established that CO2 in concentrations
similar to those in blood (5.1%, pCO2 37.5 mmHg) and at high concentrations
(8.2%, pCO2 60 mmHg; 20%, pCO2 146 mmHg) showed pronounced inhibitory effect
on the AOF generation in all the studied cells (usually reducing it 2 to 4
times). Those results were obtained not only after the direct contact of
isolated cells with CO2, but also after the whole body exposure to CO2.
Besides, it was established that venous blood gas mixture (CO2 - 45 mmHg, +O2
- 39 mmHg, + N2 - 646 mmHg) inhibited the AOF generation in cited cells more
than the arterial blood gas mixture (CO2 - 40 mmHg, + O2 - 95 mmHg, + N2 - 595
mmHg). Carbon dioxide action mechanism was developed partially through the
inhibition of the OAF generation in mitochondria and through deceleration of
NADPH oxidative activity. Finally, it was established that CO2 led to the
better coordination of oxidation and phosphorylation and increased the
phosphorylation velocity in liver mitochondria. The results clearly confirmed
the general property of CO2 to inhibit significantly the AOF generation in all
the cell types. This favors the new explanation of the well-known evolutionary
paradox: the Earth life and organisms preservation when the oxygen, that shows
toxic effects on the cells through the AOF, occurs in the atmosphere. The
results can also be used to explain in a new way the vasodilating effect of
CO2 and the favorable hypercapnotherapy influence on the course of some
bronchial asthma forms. The results are probably significant for the analysis
of important bio-ecological problem, such as the increase of CO2 concentration
in the atmosphere and its effect on the humans and animals.

  

 **Aviakosm Ekolog Med 1997;31(6):56-9. [Functional activity of peripheral
blood neutrophils of rats during combined effects of hypoxia, hypercapnia and
cooling]. Baev VI, Kuprava MV**

Functional activity of neutrophilic leukocytes was studied in blood of rats
immediately following single and repeated gradual increase in carbon dioxide
and decrease in oxygen concentrations with the ambient temperature at 2 to 3
degrees C. Phagocytic activity was shown to alter as the number of
phagocyticneutrophilic granulocytes, absorptivity or the phagocytic index, and
the coefficient of phagocytosis completeness were elevated and levels of
oxygen-dependent and oxygen-independent metabolism were reduced.

  

 **Izv Akad Nauk Ser Biol 1997 Mar-Apr;(2):204-17. [Carbon dioxide--a
universal inhibitor of the generation of active oxygen forms by cells]. Kogan
AKh, Grachev SV, Eliseeva SV, Bolevich S**

Studies were carried out on blood phagocytes and alveolar macrophages of 96
humans, on the cells of the viscera and tissue phagocytes (liver, brain,
myocardium, lungs, kidneys, stomach, and skeletal muscle), and liver
mitochondria of 186 random bred white mice. Generation of the active oxygen
forms was determined using different methods after direct effect of CO2 on the
cells and biopsies and indirect effect of CO2 on the integral organism. The
results obtained suggest that CO2 at a tension close to that observed in the
blood (37.0 mm Hg) and high tensions (60 or 146 mm Hg) is a potent inhibitor
of generation of the active oxygen forms by the cells and mitochondria of the
human and tissues. The mechanism of CO2 effect appears to be realized,
partially, through inhibition of the NADPH-oxidase activity. The results are
important for deciphering of a paradox of evolution, life preservation upon
appearance of oxygen in the atmosphere and succession of anaerobiosis by
aerobiosis, and elucidation of some other problems of biology and medicine, as
well as analysis of the global bioecological problem, such as ever increasing
CO2 content in the atmosphere.

  

 **Ukr Biokhim Zh 1978 Mar-Apr;50(2):150-4.. [Content of adenine nucleotides
and creatinephosphate in brain, myocardium, liver and skeletal muscle under
combined action of hypercapnia, hypoxia and cooling]. Baev VI, Drukina MA**

Cooling of rats under conditions of hypercapina and hypoxia induced no changes
in the content of adenine nucleotides in the brain and skeletal muscles and
decreased their concentration in the liver and myocardium. The content of
creatine phosphate increased in the brain, but had no changes in the other
tissues. 48 hours after cooling the amount of adenine nucleotides in the brain
was higher as compared with the initial values, that was due to an increase in
the ATP concentration; in the other tissues the contents of adenine
nucleotides did not differ from that of the intact rats. The repeated action
(48 hours after the first influences) caused no changes in the contents of
adenine nucleotides in skeletal muscles and decreased them in the myocardium
and liver. In the brain their amount and the content of creatinephosphate were
increased as related to the intact rats. In the brain and myocardium the level
of NADPH decreased after the first action and 48 hours after impact it
restored up to the inital values. After repeated impact the level of NADPH in
the brain restored up to initial values, in the myocardium it was increased.

  

 **Fiziol Zh SSSR 1978 Oct;64(10):1456-62. [Role of CO2 fixation in increasing
the body's resistance to acute hypoxia]. Baev VI, Vasil'ev VV, Nikolaeva EN**

In rats, the phenomenon of considerable increase in resistance to acute
hypoxia observed after 2-hour stay under conditions of gradually increasing
concentration of CO2, decreasing concentration of O2, And external cooling at
2--3 degrees seems to be based mainly on changes in concentration of CO2
(ACCORDINGLY, PCO2 and other forms of CO2 in the blood). The high resistance
to acute hypoxia develops as well after subcutaneous or i.v. administration of
1.0 ml of water solution (169.2 mg/200 g) NaHCO2, (NH4)2SO4, MgSO4, MnSO4, and
ZnSO4 (in proportion: 35 : 5 : 2 : 0.15 : 0.15, resp.) or after 1-hour effect
of increased hypercapnia and hypoxia without cooling.

  

 **Vopr Med Khim 1976 Jan-Feb;22(1):37-41 [Pyridine nucleotide content in the
brain and myocardium of rats under combined effect of hypercapnia, hypoxia and
cooling]. Baev VI, Drukina MA**

In experiments with rats, subjected to single and repeated simultaneous effect
of hypercapnia, hypoxia and cooling, contents of pyridine nucleotides (NAD,
NADP, NAD-H2 and NADP-H2) and macroergic substances were studied and also the
activity of dehydrogenases of the pentose pathway was determined in brain and
myocardium. In brain NADP was not practically determined and in heart its
content was increased after the first and the second treatments. Content of
NADP-H2 was distinctly decreased in both tissues after the single treatment.
NAD was not altered in the tissues in all the periods studied. The amount of
NAD-H2 was decreased in brain after the single treatment and it was increased
in myocardium after the repeated one. In the activity of dehydrogenases marked
alterations were not observed. Total macroergic substances were not altered in
brain after the single treatment and after the repeated one they were
increased mainly due to the ATP increase. In myocardium total macroergic
substances were decreased after the both treatments.

[ASTHMA: Buteyko's Cure.](http://www.members.westnet.com.au/pkolb/buteyko.htm)

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2012. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

