![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Glucose and sucrose for diabetes  
**  

Diabetes has been known since ancient times as a wasting disease in which
sugar was lost in the urine, but more recently the name has been used to
describe the presence of more than the normal amount of glucose in the blood,
even in the absence of glucose in the urine. Some of the medical ideas
regarding the original form of the condition have been applied to the newer
form.  
Cultural "paradigms" or ideologies are so convenient that people often don't
bother to doubt them, and they are sometimes so rigorously enforced that
people learn to keep their doubts to themselves. Public concern about diabetes
has been growing for decades, but despite the introduction of insulin and
other drugs to treat it, and massive campaigns to "improve" eating habits,
mortality from diabetes has been increasing during the last 100 years.
Diabetes ("type 1") has been increasing even among children (Barat, et al.,
2008).

  
A basic meaning of homeopathic medicine is the support of the organism's
ability to heal itself; the essence of allopathy is that the physician fights
"a disease" to cure the patient, e.g., by cutting out tumors or killing germs.

  
Confidence in the organism's essential rationality led the doctors with a
homeopathic orientation to see a fever as part of a recuperative process,
while their allopathic opponents sometimes saw fever as the essence of the
sickness to be cured. Homeopaths concentrated on the nature of the patient;
allopaths concentrated on a disease entity in itself, and were likely to
ignore the patient's idiosyncrasies and preferences.

  
Diabetes was named for the excessive urination it causes, and for the sugar in
the urine. It was called the sugar disease, and physicians were taught that
sugar was the problem. Patients were ordered to avoid sweet foods, and in
hospitals they were sometimes locked up to keep them from finding sweets. The
practice was derived from ideology, not from any evidence that the treatment
helped.

  
In 1857, M. Piorry in Paris and William Budd in Bristol, England, reasoned
that if a patient was losing a pound of sugar every day in 10 liters of urine,
and was losing weight very rapidly, and had an intense craving for sugar, it
would be reasonable to replace some of the lost sugar, simply because the
quick weight loss of diabetes invariably led to death. Keeping patients from
eating what they craved seemed both cruel and futile.

  
After Budd's detailed reports of a woman's progressive recovery over a period
of several weeks when he prescribed 8 ounces of sugar every day, along with a
normal diet including beef and beef broth, a London physician, Thomas
Williams, wrote sarcastically about Budd's metaphysical ideas, and reported
his own trial of a diet that he described as similar to Budd's. But after two
or three days he decided his patients were getting worse, and stopped the
experiment.

  
Williams' publication was presented as a scientific refutation of Budd's
deluded homeopathic ideas, but Budd hadn't explained his experiment as
anything more than an attempt to slow the patient's death from wasting which
was sure to be the result of losing so much sugar in the urine. The following
year Budd described another patient, a young man who had become too weak to
work and who was losing weight at an extreme rate. Budd's prescription
included 8 ounces of white sugar and 4 ounces of honey every day, and again,
instead of increasing the amount of glucose in the urine, the amount decreased
quickly as the patient began eating almost as much sugar as was being lost
initially, and then as the loss of sugar in the urine decreased, the patient
gained weight and recovered his strength.

  
Drs. Budd and Piorry described patients recovering from an incurable disease,
and that has usually been enough to make the medical profession antagonistic.
Even when a physician has himself diagnosed diabetes and told a patient that
it would be necessary to inject insulin for the rest of his life, if that
patient recovers by changing his diet, the physician will typically say that
the diagnosis was wrong, because diabetes is incurable.

  
Twenty-five years ago, some rabbits were made diabetic with a poison that
killed their insulin-secreting pancreatic beta-cells, and when some of them
recovered from the diabetes after being given supplemental DHEA, it was found
that their beta-cells had regenerated. The more recent interest in stem cells
has led several research groups to acknowledge that in animals the insulin-
producing cells are able to regenerate.

  
It is now conceivable that there will be an effort to understand the factors
that damage the beta-cells, and the factors that allow them to regenerate. The
observations of Budd and Piorry would be a good place to start such a
reconsideration.

  
For many years, physicians have been taught that diabetes is either "genetic"
or possibly caused by a viral infection, that might trigger an "autoimmune
reaction," but the study of cellular respiration and energy metabolism and
endocrinology has provided more convincing explanations. The antibodies that
are found in the "autoimmune" conditions are evidence of tissue damage, but
the damage may have been done by metabolic toxins, with the immune system's
involvement being primarily the removal of defective cells.

  
In the 1940s, Bernardo Houssay found that coconut oil protected animals from
poison-induced diabetes, while a lard-based diet failed to protect them.
Later, glucose itself was found to protect the pancreatic beta-cells from
poisons.

  
In 1963, P.J. Randle clearly described the inhibition of glucose oxidation by
free fatty acids. Later, when lipid emulsions came into use for intravenous
feeding in hospitals, it was found that they blocked glucose oxidation,
lowered the metabolic rate, suppressed immunity, and increased lipid
peroxidation and oxidative stress.  
Estrogen and stress are both known to create some of the conditions of
diabetes, while increasing fat oxidation and inhibiting glucose oxidation.
Emotional stress, overwork, trauma, and infections have been known to initiate
diabetes. Estrogen increases free fatty acids and decreases glycogen storage,
and when birth control pills were becoming popular, some researchers warned
that they might cause diabetes. But the food oil industry and the estrogen
industry were satisfied with the medical doctrine that diabetes was caused by
eating too much sugar.  
If the essence of diabetes is the presence of too much sugar, then it seems
reasonable to argue that it is the excess sugar that's responsible for the
suffering and death associated with the disease, otherwise, how would the
prohibition of sugar in the diet be justified? In fact, the argument is made
(e.g., Muggeo, 1998) that it is the hyperglycemia that causes problems such as
hypertension, kidney failure, heart failure, neuropathy, blindness, dementia,
and gangrene.

  
As information about the many physiological and biochemical events associated
with diabetes has accumulated, the basic doctrine that "sugar causes diabetes"
has extended itself to whatever the topic of discussion is **:** "Glucose
causes" the death of beta-cells, glucose causes blood vessels to become leaky,
glucose causes cells to be unable to absorb glucose, glucose causes the
formation of free radicals, glucose impairs immunity and wound healing, but
causes inflammation while preventing the "respiratory burst" in which free
radicals are produced by cells that cause inflammation, it disturbs enzyme
functions, impairs nerve conduction and muscle strength, etc., and it is also
addictive, causing people to irrationally seek the very material that is
poisoning them.

  
Tens of thousands of publications describe the pathogenic effects of sugar. To
prove their point, they grow cells in a culture dish, and find that when they
are exposed to excess glucose, often 5 times the normal amount, they
deteriorate. In the artificial conditions of cell culture, the oversupply of
glucose causes lactic acid to accumulate, leading to toxic effects. But in the
organism, the hyperglycemia is compensating for a sensed deficiency of
glucose, a need for more energy.

  
If diabetes means that cells can't absorb or metabolize glucose, then any
cellular function that requires glucose will be impaired, despite the presence
of glucose in the blood. It is the intracellular absence of glucose which is
problematic, rather than its extracellular excess.  
Neuroglycopenia (or neuroglucopenia) or intracellular glycopenia refers to the
deficit of glucose in cells. When the brain senses a lack of glucose, nerves
are activated to increase the amount of glucose in the blood, to correct the
problem. As long as the brain senses the need for more glucose, the regulatory
systems will make the adjustments to the blood glucose level.

  
The antagonism between fat and sugar that Randle described can involve the
suppression of sugar oxidation when the concentration of fats in the
bloodstream is increased by eating fatty food, or by releasing fats from the
tissues by lipolysis, but it can also involve the suppression of fat oxidation
by inhibiting the release of fatty acids from the tissues, when a sufficient
amount of sugar is eaten.

  
When a normal person, or even a "type 2 diabetic," is given a large dose of
sugar, there is a suppression of lipolysis, and the concentration of free
fatty acids in the bloodstream decreases, though the suppression is weaker in
the diabetic (Soriguer, et al., 2008). Insulin, released by the sugar,
inhibits lipolysis, reducing the supply of fats to the respiring cells.

  
Free fatty acids suppress mitochondrial respiration (Kamikawa and Yamazaki,
1981), leading to increased glycolysis (producing lactic acid) to maintain
cellular energy. The suppression of mitochondrial respiration increases the
production of toxic free radicals, and the decreased carbon dioxide makes the
proteins more susceptible to attack by free radicals. The lactate produced
under the influence of excessive fat metabolism stimulates the release of
endorphins, which are lipolytic, releasing more free fatty acids from the
tissues. Acting through cytokines such as interleukin-6, lactate shifts the
balance toward the catabolic hormones, leading to tissue wasting.

  
Lactic acid itself, and the longer chain fatty acids, inhibit the regulatory
enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase (which is activated by insulin), reducing the
oxidative production of energy. Drugs to activate this enzyme are being
studied by the pharmaceutical industry as treatments for diabetes and cancer
(for example, DCA, dichloroacetate).

  
Oxidative damage of proteins is often described as glycation or glycosylation,
but it really consists of many addition and crosslinking reactions, most often
onto, or between, lysine groups. Carbon dioxide normally associates with
lysine groups, so the destructive reactions are favored when carbon dioxide is
displaced by lactic acid. The reactive fragments of polyunsaturated fatty
acids are much more often the source of the protein-damaging radicals than the
carbohydrates are.

  
The importance of the fats in causing type-2 diabetes is coming to be
accepted, for example Li, et al., recently (2008) said "The cellular link
between fatty acids and ROS (reactive oxygen species) is essentially the
mitochondrion, a key organelle for the control of insulin secretion.
Mitochondria are the main source of ROS and are also the primary target of
oxidative attacks."  
But much earlier (Wright, et al., 1988) it had been demonstrated that a
deficiency of the "essential fatty acids" prevents toxin-induced diabetes and
greatly increases resistance to inflammation (Lefkowith, et al., 1990). The
lack of those so-called "essential fatty acids" also prevents autoimmune
diabetes in a strain of diabetic mice (Benhamou, et al., 1995),

  
Suppressing fatty acid oxidation improves the contraction of the heart muscle
and increases the efficiency of oxygen use (Chandler, et al., 2003). Various
drugs are being considered for that purpose, but niacinamide is already being
used to improve heart function, since it lowers the concentration of free
fatty acids.

  
The antimetabolic and toxic effects of the polyunsaturated fatty acids can
account for the "insulin resistance" that characterizes type-2 diabetes, but
similar actions in the pancreatic beta-cells can impair or kill those cells,
creating a deficiency of insulin, resembling type-1 diabetes.  
The suppression of mitochondrial respiration causes increased free radical
damage, and the presence of polyunsaturated fatty acids in the suppressed cell
increases the rate of fat decomposition and production of toxins.

  
Increasing the rate of respiration by replacing the fats with glucose reduces
the availability of electrons that can trigger lipid peroxidation and produce
toxic free radicals, and the shift of fuel also increases the amount of carbon
dioxide produced, which can protect the protein amino groups such as lysine
from glycation and lipoxidation.

  
While it's clear that it is the excessive oxidation of fat that damages cells
in the "diabetic" state in which cells aren't able to use glucose, it's
important to look at some of the situations in which so many researchers are
blaming problems on hyperglycemia.

  
Important problems in diabetes are slow wound healing, excessive permeability
or leakiness of blood vessels which allows molecules such as albumin to be
extravasated, and the impaired function and survival of pancreatic beta-cells.

  
During the healing of a wound in a diabetic individual, the local
concentration of glucose decreases and then entirely disappears, as healing
stops. Applying glucose and insulin topically to the wound, it heals quickly.
The very old practice of treating deep wounds with honey or granulated sugar
has been studied in controlled situations, including the treatment of diabetic
ulcers, infected deep wounds following heart surgery, and wounds of lepers.
The treatment eradicates bacterial infections better than some antiseptics,
and accelerates healing without scarring, or with minimal scarring. The sugar
regulates the communication between cells, and optimizes the synthesis of
collagen and extracellular matrix.

  
An excess of insulin, causing hypoglycemia, can cause blood vessels, for
example in the brain and kidneys, to become leaky, and this has been claimed
to be an effect of insulin itself. However, the same leakiness can be produced
by an analog of glucose that can't be metabolized, so that intracellular
glycopenia is produced. The harmful effect that has been ascribed to excessive
insulin can be prevented by maintaining an adequate supply of glucose (Uezu
and Murakami, 1993), showing that it is the lack of glucose, rather than the
excess insulin, that causes the vascular malfunction. Fructose also reduces
the leakiness of blood vessels (Plante, et al., 2003). Many of the
complications of diabetes are caused by increased vascular leakiness (Simard,
et al., 2002).

  
Sugar can protect the beta-cells from the free fatty acids, apparently in the
same ways that it protects the cells of blood vessels, restoring metabolic
energy and preventing damage to the mitochondria. Glucose suppresses
superoxide formation in beta-cells (Martens, et al., 2005) and apparently in
other cells including brain cells. __ (Isaev, et al., 2008).

  
The beta-cell protecting effect of glucose is supported by bicarbonate and
sodium. Sodium activates cells to produce carbon dioxide, allowing them to
regulate calcium, preventing overstimulation and death. For a given amount of
energy released, the oxidation of glucose produces more carbon dioxide and
uses less oxygen than the oxidation of fatty acids.

  

The toxic excess of intracellular calcium that damages the insulin-secreting
cells in the relative absence of carbon dioxide is analogous to the increased
excitation of nerves and muscles that can be produced by hyperventilation.

  

In every type of tissue, it is the failure to oxidize glucose that produces
oxidative stress and cellular damage. Even feeding enough sucrose to cause fat
deposition in the liver can protect the liver from oxidative stress (Spolarics
and Meyenhofer, 2000), possibly by mechanisms such as those involved in the
treatment of alcoholic liver disease with saturated fats.

  
The active thyroid hormone, T3, protects the heart by supporting the oxidation
of glucose (Liu, et al., 1998). The amount of T3 produced by the liver depends
mainly on the amount of glucose available.

  
Animals that have been made diabetic with relatively low doses of the poison
streptozotocin can recover functional beta-cells spontaneously, and the rate
of recovery is higher in pregnant animals (Hartman, et al., 1989). Pregnancy
stabilizes blood sugar at a higher level, and progesterone favors the
oxidation of glucose rather than fats.

  
A recent study suggests that recovery of the pancreas can be very fast. A
little glucose was infused for 4 days into rats, keeping the blood glucose
level normal, and the mass of beta-cells was found to have increased 2.5
times. Cell division wasn't increased, so apparently the additional glucose
was preventing the death of beta-cells, or stimulating the conversion of
another type of cell to become insulin-secreting beta-cells (Jetton, et al.,
2008).

  
That study is very important in relation to stem cells in general, because it
either means that glandular cells are turning over ("streaming") at a much
higher rate than currently recognized in biology and medicine, or it means
that (when blood sugar is adequate) stimulated cells are able to recruit
neighboring cells to participate in their specialized function. Either way, it
shows the great importance of environmental factors in regulating our anatomy
and physiology.

  
"Diabetologists" don't regularly measure their patients' insulin, but they
usually make the assumption that insulin is the main factor regulating blood
sugar. In one study, it was found that the insulin molecule itself,
immunoreactive insulin, accounted for only about 8% of the serum's insulin-
like action. The authors of that study believed that potassium was the main
other factor in the serum that promoted the disposition of glucose. Since
potassium and glucose are both always present in the blood, their effects on
each other have usually been ignored.

  
Cellular activation (by electrical, nervous, chemical, or mechanical
stimulation) causes glucose to be absorbed and oxidized, even in the absence
of insulin and in otherwise insulin-resistant individuals. I think this local
interaction between the need for energy and the production of energy
predominates in good health, with insulin and other hormones facilitating the
process in times of stress. A variety of local tissue regulators, including
GABA and glutamate, probably participate in these interactions, in the brain,
endocrine glands, muscles, and other tissues, and are probably involved in the
relaxing and analgesic actions of the sugars.

  
The GABA system (GABA is highly concentrated in the beta-cells) is involved in
regulating blood sugar, inhibiting the release of glucagon when glucose isn't
needed, and apparently allowing the beta cells to discriminate between amino
acids and glucose (Gu, et al., 1993) and acting as a survival and growth
factor for neighboring cells (Ligon, et al., 2007).

  
The damaged beta-cells lose the enzyme (glutamate dehydrogenase) that makes
GABA, and their ratio of linoleic acid to saturated and monounsaturated fat
increases, a change that corresponds to a decreased metabolism of glucose.

  
The free intracellular calcium that can become toxic is normally bound safely
by well-energized mitochondria, and in the bloodstream it is kept safely
complexed with carbon dioxide. The thyroid hormone, producing carbon dioxide,
helps to sustain the level of ionized calcium (Lindblom, et al., 2001). In a
vitamin D deficiency, or a calcium deficiency, the parathyroid hormone
increases, and this hormone can contribute to many inflammatory and
degenerative processes, including diabetes. Consuming enough calcium and
vitamin D to keep the parathyroid hormone suppressed is important to protect
against the degenerative conditions.

  
When animals were fed an otherwise balanced diet lacking vitamin D, with the
addition of either 68% sucrose or 68% starch, the bones of those on the starch
diet failed to develop normally, as would be expected with a vitamin D
deficiency, and their serum calcium was low. However, the bones of those on
the diet with sucrose developed properly, and didn't show evidence of being
calcium deficient, though they weren't quite as heavy as those that also
received an adequate amount of vitamin D (Artus, 1975). This study suggests
that the famous dietetic emphasis on the "complex carbohydrates," i.e.,
starches, has made an important contribution to the prevalence of
osteoporosis, as well as obesity and other degeneration conditions.

  
Both vitamin D and vitamin K, another important calcium-regulating nutrient,
are now known to prevent diabetes. Both of these vitamins require carbon
dioxide for disposing of calcium properly, preventing its toxicity. When
carbon dioxide is inadequate, for example from simple hyperventilation or from
hypothyroidism, calcium is allowed to enter cells, causing inappropriate
excitation, sometimes followed by calcification.

  
Keeping an optimal level of carbon dioxide (for example, when adapted to high
altitude) causes calcium to be controlled, resulting in lowered parathyroid
hormone, an effect similar to supplementing with calcium, vitamin D, and
vitamin K. (E.g., Nicolaidou, et al, 2006.) Glycine, like carbon dioxide,
protects proteins against oxidative damage (Lezcano, et al., 2006), so
including gelatin (very rich in glycine) in the diet is probably protective.

  
The contribution of PTH to inflammation and degeneration is just being
acknowledged (e.g., Kuwabara, 2008), but the mechanism undoubtedly involves
the fact that it is lipolytic, increasing the concentration of free fatty
acids that suppress metabolism and interfere with the use of glucose.

  
When we talk about increasing the metabolic rate, and the benefits it
produces, we are comparing the rate of metabolism in the presence of thyroid,
sugar, salt, and adequate protein to the "normal" diet, containing smaller
amounts of those "stimulating" substances. It would be more accurate if we
would speak of the suppressive nature of the habitual diet, in relation to the
more optimal diet, which provides more energy for work and adaptation, while
minimizing the toxic effects of free radicals.

  
Feeding animals a normal diet with the addition of Coca-Cola, or with a
similar amount of sucrose, has been found to let them increase their calorie
intake by 50% without increasing their weight gain (Bukowiecki, et al., 1983).
Although plain sucrose can alleviate the metabolic suppression of an average
diet, the effect of sugars in the diet is much more likely to be healthful in
the long run when they are associated with an abundance of minerals, as in
milk and fruit, which provide potassium and calcium and other protective
nutrients.

  
Avoiding the starches such as cereals and beans, and using fruits as a major
part of the diet helps to minimize the effects of the polyunsaturated fats.

  
Celiac disease or gluten sensitivity is associated with diabetes and
hypothyroidism. There is a cross reaction between the gluten protein molecule
and an enzyme which is expressed under the influence of estrogen. This is
another reason for simply avoiding cereal products.

  
Brewers' yeast has been used traditionally to correct diabetes, and its high
content of niacin and other B vitamins and potassium might account for its
beneficial effects. However, eating a large quantity of it is likely to cause
gas, so some people prefer to extract the soluble nutrients with hot water.
Yeast contains a considerable amount of estrogen, and the water extract
probably leaves much of that in the insoluble starchy residue. Liver is
another rich source of the B vitamins as well as the oily vitamins, but it can
suppress thyroid function, so usually one meal a week is enough.

  
The supplements that most often help to correct diabetes-like conditions are
niacinamide, thiamine, thyroid, and progesterone or pregnenolone. Vitamins D
and K are clearly protective against developing diabetes, and their effects on
many regulatory processes suggest that they would also help to correct
existing hyperglycemia.

  
Drinking coffee seems to be very protective against developing diabetes. Its
niacin and magnesium are clearly important, but it is also a rich source of
antioxidants, and it helps to maintain normal thyroid and progesterone
production. Chocolate is probably protective too, and it is a good source of
magnesium and antioxidants.

  
A recent study (Xia, et al., 2008) showed that inhibition of cholesterol
synthesis by beta-cells impairs insulin synthesis, and that replenishing
cholesterol restores the insulin secretion. Green tea contains this type of
inhibitor, but its use has nevertheless been associated with a reduced risk of
diabetes. Caffeine is likely to be the main protective substance in these
foods.

  
Although antioxidants can be protective against diabetes, not all things sold
as "antioxidants" are safe; many botannical "antioxidants" are estrogenic.
Hundreds of herbal products can lower blood sugar, but many of them are simply
toxic, and the reduction of blood glucose can make some problems worse.

  
The supplements I mention above--including caffeine--have antiinflammatory,
antioxidative and energy-promoting effects. Inflammation, interfering with
cellular energy production, is probably the essential feature of the things
called diabetes.

  
Aspirin has a very broad spectrum of antiinflammatory actions, and is
increasingly being recommended for preventing complications of diabetes. One
of the consequences of inflammation is hyperglycemia, and aspirin helps to
correct that (Yuan, et al., 2001), while protecting proteins against oxidative
damage (Jafarnejad, et al, 2001).

  
If Dr. Budd's thinking (and results) had been more widely accepted when his
publications appeared, thinking about "diabetes" might have led to earlier
investigation of the syndromes of stress and tissue wasting, with insulin
being identified as just one of many regulatory substances, and a large amount
of useless and harmful activity treating hyperglycemia as the enemy, rather
than part of an adaptive reaction, might have been avoided.  
  
REFERENCES  
Ann Nutr Aliment. 1975;29(4):305-12. **[Effects of administering diets with
starch or sucrose basis on certain parameters of calcium metabolism in the
young, growing rat]** Artus M.  
Diabetes Metab. 2008 Oct 24. **The growing incidence of type 1 diabetes in
children: The 17-year French experience in Aquitaine.** Barat P, Valade A,
Brosselin P, Alberti C, Maurice-Tison S, Lévy-Marchal C.  
Pancreas. 1995 Jul;11(1):26-37. **Essential fatty acid deficiency prevents
autoimmune diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice through a positive impact on
antigen-presenting cells and Th2 lymphocytes.** Benhamou PY, Mullen Y, Clare-
Salzler M, Sangkharat A, Benhamou C, Shevlin L, Go VL.  
The Retrospect of Medicine, XXXVII January-June, 1858 Edited by W.
Braithwaite, p. 122: SUGAR AND DIABETES: A CASE. By Dr. William Budd, Senior
Physician to the Bristol Royal Infirmary.  
Am J Physiol. 1983 Apr;244(4):R500-7. **Effects of sucrose, caffeine, and cola
beverages on obesity, cold resistance, and adipose tissue cellularity.**
Bukowiecki LJ, Lupien J, Folléa N, Jahjah L.  
Cardiovasc Res. 2003 Jul 1;59(1):143-51. **Partial inhibition of fatty acid
oxidation increases regional contractile power and efficiency during demand-
induced ischemia.** Chandler MP, Chavez PN, McElfresh TA, Huang H, Harmon CS,
Stanley WC.  
Med Sci (Paris). 2003 Aug-Sep;19(8-9):827-33. **[ Contribution of free fatty
acids to impairment of insulin secretion and action: mechanism of beta-cell
lipotoxicity]** [Article in French] Girard J.  
Diabetes Metab. 21(2), 79-88, 1995. **Role of free fatty acids in insulin
resistance of subjects with non-insulin-dependent diabetes,** Girard J.
"Studies performed in the rat suggest that impaired glucose-induced insulin
secretion could also be related to chronic exposure of pancreatic beta cells
to elevated plasma free fatty acid levels." [This direct effect of free fatty
acids on the beta cells is extremely important. Estrogen--probably via GH--
increases free fatty acids, and adrenalin--which is elevated in hypothyroidism
--increases the release of free fatty acids from storage. Free fatty acids
impair mitochondrail energy production.]  
Med Sci (Paris). 2005 Dec;21 Spec No:19-25. **[Contribution of free fatty
acids to impairment of insulin secretion and action. mechanism of beta-cell
lipotoxicity]** Girard J.  
Acta Diabetologica 32(1), 44-48, 1995. **Effect of lipid oxidation on the
regulation of glucose utilization in obese patients** , Golay A., et al.,
[Free fatty acids strongly and quickly depress the ability to oxidize or store
glucose.]  
Life Sci. 1993;52(8):687-94. **Suppressive effect of GABA on insulin secretion
from the pancreatic beta-cells in the rat.** Gu XH, Kurose T, Kato S, Masuda
K, Tsuda K, Ishida H, Seino Y.  
Exp Clin Endocrinol 1989 May;93(2-3):225-30. **Spontaneou s recovery of
streptozotocin diabetes in mice.** Hartmann K, Besch W, Zuhlke H.  
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 92(8), 3096-3099, 1995. **High fat diet-induced
hyperglycemia: Prevention by low level expression of a glucose transporter
(GLUT4) minigene in transgenic mice**. Ikemoto S, et al. "...mice fed a high-
fat (safflower oil) diet develop defective glycemic control, hyperglycemia,
and obesity."  
Biochemistry (Mosc). 2008 Feb;73(2):149-55. ** Mitochondrial free radical
production induced by glucose deprivation in cerebellar granule neurons.**
Isaev NK, Stelmashook EV, Dirnagl U, Plotnikov EY, Kuvshinova EA, Zorov DB.  
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Feb;324(2):850-7. **Investigatio n of the
mechanisms involved in the high-dose and long-term acetyl salicylic acid
therapy of type I diabetic rats.** Jafarnejad A, Bathaie SZ, Nakhjavani M,
Hassan MZ.  
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Apr;294(4):E679-87. **Enhanced beta-cell
mass without increased proliferation following chronic mild glucose
infusion.** Jetton TL, Everill B, Lausier J, Roskens V, Habibovic A, LaRock K,
Gokin A, Peshavaria M, Leahy JL.  
World J Surg. 2001 Feb;25(2):142-6. **Effect of sucrose on collagen metabolism
in keloid, hypertrophic scar, and granulation tissue fibroblast cultures.**
Kössi J, Vähä-Kreula M, Peltonen J, Risteli J, Laato M.  
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1994 Jan;40(1):47-53. **Impaired glucose tolerance and
insulin insensitivity in primary hyperparathyroidism.** Kumar S, Olukoga AO,
Gordon C, Mawer EB, France M, Hosker JP, Davies M, Boulton AJ.  
Diabetes 44(6), 718-720, 1995. **Amelioration of high fat feeding-induced
insulin resistance in skeletal muscle with the antiglucocorticoid RU486.**
Kusunoki M, et al. "These results suggest that glucocorticoids play, in a
tissue-specific manner, a role in the maintenance and/or production of insulin
resistance produced by high-fat feeding."  
Osteoporos Int. 2008 Sep 30. **High prevalence of vitamin K and D deficiency
and decreased BMD in inflammatory bowel disease.** Kuwabara A, Tanaka K,
Tsugawa N, Nakase H, Tsuji H, Shide K, Kamao M, Chiba T, Inagaki N, Okano T,
Kido S.  
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Jun;294(6):C1542-51. **Octylphen ol stimulates
resistin gene expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes via the estrogen receptor and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathways. **Lee MJ, Lin H, Liu CW, Wu
MH, Liao WJ, Chang HH, Ku HC, Chien YS, Ding WH, Kao YH.  
J Immunol 1990 Sep 1;145(5):1523-9, **Manipulation of the acute inflammatory
response by dietary polyunsaturated fatty acid modulation,** Lefkowith JB,
Morrison A, Lee V, Rogers M.  
Rev Alerg Mex. 2006 Nov-Dec;53(6):212-6. **Effect of glycine on the immune
response of the experimentally diabetic rats.** Lezcano Meza D, Terán Ortiz L,
Carvajal Sandoval G, Gutiérrez de la Cadena M, Terán Escandón D, Estrada Parra
S.  
Circ Shock 1990 Jun;31(2):159-170, **Resistance of essential fatty acid-
deficient rats to endotoxin-induced increases in vascular permeability,** Li
EJ, Cook JA, Spicer KM, Wise WC, Rokach J, Halushka PV.  
Diabetologia. 2007 Apr;50(4):764-73. **Regulation of pancreatic islet cell
survival and replication by gamma-aminobutyric acid.** Ligon B, Yang J, Morin
SB, Ruberti MF, Steer ML.  
Horm Res. 2001;55(2):81-7. **Decreased levels of ionized calcium one year
after hemithyroidectomy: importance of reduced thyroid hormones.** Lindblom P,
Valdemarsson S, Lindergård B, Westerdahl J, Bergenfelz A.  
Am J Physiol. 1998 Sep;275(3 Pt 1):E392-9. **Acute effects of triiodothyronine
on glucose and fatty acid metabolism during reperfusion of ischemic rat
hearts.** Liu Q, Clanachan AS, Lopaschuk GD.  
J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20389-96. **Glucose suppresses superoxide
generation in metabolically responsive pancreatic beta cells.** Martens GA,
Cai Y, Hinke S, Stangé G, Van de Casteele M, Pipeleers D.  
Diabet Med. 1998;15 Suppl 4:S60-2. **Accelerated complications in Type 2
diabetes mellitus: the need for greater awareness and earlier detection.**
Muggeo M. "Persistent hyperglycaemia is the underlying pathogenic factor
responsible for chronic diabetic complications in Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes
mellitus."  
Eur J Pediatr. 2006 Aug;165(8):540-5. **The effect of vitamin K
supplementation on biochemical markers of bone formation in children and
adolescents with cystic fibrosis.** Nicolaidou P, Stavrinadis I, Loukou I,
Papadopoulou A, Georgouli H, Douros K, Priftis KN, Gourgiotis D, Matsinos YG,
Doudounakis S.  
Metabolism. 2007 May;56(5):599-607. **Long-term consumption of caffeine
improves glucose homeostasis by enhancing insulinotropic action through islet
insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 signaling in diabetic rats.** Park S,
Jang JS, Hong SM.  
Cardiovasc Res. 2003 Oct 1;59(4):963-70. **Reduction of endothelial NOS and
bradykinin-induced extravasation of macromolecules in skeletal muscle of the
fructose-fed rat model.** Plante GE, Perreault M, Lanthier A, Marette A,
Maheux P.  
Cell Physiol Biochem. 2007;20(1-4):213-26. **Effect of lipid infusion on
metabolism and force of rat skeletal muscles during intense contractions.**
Silveira L, Hirabara SM, Alberici LC, Lambertucci RH, Peres CM, Takahashi HK,
Pettri A, Alba-Loureiro T, Luchessi AD, Cury-Boaventura MF, Vercesi AE, Curi
R.  
Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2002 Dec;80(12):1203-7. **Inhibitory effect of a
novel bradykinin B1 receptor antagonist, R-954, on enhanced vascular
permeability in type 1 diabetic mice.** Simard B, Gabra BH, Sirois P.  
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008 Oct 23. **Changes in the Serum Composition of
Free-fatty Acids During an Intravenous Glucose Tolerance Test.** Soriguer F,
García-Serrano S, García-Almeida JM, Garrido-Sánchez L, García-Arnés J,
Tinahones FJ, Cardona I, Rivas-Marín J, Gallego-Perales JL, García-Fuentes E.  
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Sep 27;1487(2-3):190-200. **Augmente d resistance
to oxidative stress in fatty rat livers induced by a short-term sucrose-rich
diet.**Spolarics Z, Meyenhofer M.  
Gen Pharmacol. 1993 Jan;24(1):95-100. **A possible mechanism for increased
cerebrovascular permeability in diabetic rats: effects of insulin and 2-deoxy-
glucose.** Uezu Y, Murakami K.  
Wound Repair Regen. 2008 Mar-Apr;16(2):288-93. **Impaired wound healing in an
acute diabetic pig model and the effects of local hyperglycemia.** Velander P,
Theopold C, Hirsch T, Bleiziffer O, Zuhaili B, Fossum M, Hoeller D, Gheerardyn
R, Chen M, Visovatti S, Svensson H, Yao F, Eriksson E.  
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Aug;85(16):6137-41. **Essential fatty acid
deficiency prevents multiple low-dose streptozotocin-induced diabetes in CD-1
mice.** Wright JR Jr, Lefkowith JB, Schreiner G, Lacy PE.  
Endocrinology. 2008 Oct;149(10):5136-45. **Inhibitio n of cholesterol
biosynthesis impairs insulin secretion and voltage-gated calcium channel
function in pancreatic beta-cells. **Xia F, Xie L, Mihic A, Gao X, Chen Y,
Gaisano HY, Tsushima RG.  
Science. 2001 Aug 31;293(5535):1673-7. **Reversal of obesity- and diet-induced
insulin resistance with salicylates or targeted disruption of Ikkbeta.** Yuan
M, Konstantopoulos N, Lee J, Hansen L, Li ZW, Karin M, Shoelson SE.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2012. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

