![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Glycemia, starch, and sugar in context**  

============================================

**_Monosaccharide \-- a simple sugar; examples, glucose,_** __ **_fructose,
ribose, galactose (galactose is also called cerebrose, brain sugar)._**

**_Disaccharide \-- two monosaccharides bound together; examples, sucrose,
lactose, maltose._**

**_Oligosaccharide \-- a short chain of monosaccharides, including
disaccharides and slightly longer chains._**

**_Polysaccharide \-- example, starch, cellulose, glycogen._**

**_Glycation \-- the attachment of a sugar to a protein._**

**_Lipolysis - the liberation of free fatty acids from triglycerides, the
neutral form in which fats are stored, bound to glycerine._**

============================================

In the 1920s, diabetes was thought to be a disease of insulin deficiency.
Eventually, measurements of insulin showed that diabetics often had normal
amounts of insulin, or above-normal amounts. There are now two kinds of
diabetes, with suggestions that the disease will soon be further
subdivided.

The degenerative diseases that are associated with hyperglycemia and commonly
called diabetes, are only indirectly related to insulin, and as an approach to
understanding or treating diabetes, the glycemic index of foods is useless.
Physiologically, it has no constructive use, and very little meaning.

Insulin is important in the regulation of blood sugar, but its importance has
been exaggerated because of the diabetes/insulin industry. Insulin itself has
been found to account for only about 8% of the "insulin-like activity" of the
blood, with potassium being probably the largest factor. There probably isn't
any process in the body that doesn't potentially affect blood sugar.

Glucagon, cortisol, adrenalin, growth hormone and thyroid tend to increase the
blood sugar, but it is common to interpret hyperglycemia as "diabetes,"
without measuring any of these factors. Even when "insulin dependent diabetes"
is diagnosed, it isn't customary to measure the insulin to see whether it is
actually deficient, before writing a prescription for insulin. People resign
themselves to a lifetime of insulin injections, without knowing why their
blood sugar is high.

Insulin release is also stimulated by amino acids such as leucine, and insulin
stimulates cells to absorb amino acids and to synthesize proteins. Since
insulin lowers blood sugar as it disposes of amino acids, eating a large
amount of protein without carbohydrate can cause a sharp decrease in blood
sugar. This leads to the release of adrenalin and cortisol, which raise the
blood sugar. Adrenalin causes fatty acids to be drawn into the blood from fat
stores, especially if the liver's glycogen stores are depleted, and cortisol
causes tissue protein to be broken down into amino acids, some of which are
used in place of carbohydrate. Unsaturated fatty acids, adrenaline, and
cortisol cause insulin resistance.

============================================  

Professional opinion can be propagated about 10,000 times faster than
research can evaluate it, or, as C. H. Spurgeon said, "A lie travels round the
world while Truth is putting on her boots."

In the 1970s, dietitians began talking about the value of including "complex
carbohydrates" in the diet. Many dietitians (all but one of the Registered
Dietitians that I knew of) claimed that starches were more slowly absorbed
than sugars, and so should be less disruptive to the blood sugar and insulin
levels. People were told to eat whole grains and legumes, and to avoid fruit
juices.

These recommendations, and their supporting ideology, are still rampant in the
culture of the United States, fostered by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
and the American Dietetic Association and the American Diabetes Association
and innumerable university departments of home economics, dietetics, or
nutrition.

Judging by present and past statements of the American Dietetic Association, I
think some kind of institutional brain defect might account for their
recommendations. Although the dietetic association now feebly acknowledges
that sugars don't raise the blood sugar more quickly than starches do, they
can't get away from their absurd old recommendations, which were never
scientifically justified **:** Eat more starches, such as bread, cereal, and
starchy vegetables--6 servings a day or more. Start the day with cold (dry)
cereal with nonfat/skim milk or a bagel with one teaspoon of jelly/jam. Put
starch center stage--pasta with tomato sauce, baked potato with chili, rice
and stir-fried beef and vegetables. Add cooked black beans, corn, or garbanzo
beans (chickpeas) to salads or casseroles.

The Dietetic Association's association with General Mills, the breakfast
cereal empire, (and Kellog, Nabisco, and many other food industry giants)
might have something to do with their starchy opinions. Starch-grain embolisms
can cause brain damage, but major money can also make people say stupid
things.

In an old experiment, a rat was tube-fed ten grams of corn-starch paste, and
then anesthetized. Ten minutes after the massive tube feeding, the professor
told the students to find how far the starch had moved along the alimentary
canal. No trace of the white paste could be found, demonstrating the speed
with which starch can be digested and absorbed. The very rapid rise of blood
sugar stimulates massive release of insulin, and rapidly converts much of the
carbohydrate into fat.

It was this sort of experiment that led to the concept of "glycemic index,"
that ranks foods according to their ability to raise the blood sugar. David
Jenkins, in 1981, knew enough about the old studies of starch digestion to
realize that the dietitians had created a dangerous cult around the complex
carbohydrates, and he did a series of measurements that showed that starch is
more glycemic than sucrose. But he simply used the amount of increase in
blood glucose during the first two hours after ingesting the food sample,
compared to that following ingestion of pure glucose, for the comparison,
neglecting the physiologically complex facts, all of the processes involved in
causing a certain amount of glucose to be present in the blood during a
certain time. (Even the taste of sweetness, without swallowing anything, can
stimulate the release of glucagon, which raises blood sugar.)

More important than the physiological vacuity of a simple glycemic measurement
was the ideology within which the whole issue developed, namely, the idea that
diabetes (conceived as chronic hyperglycemia) is caused by eating too much
sugar, i.e., chronic hyperglycemia the illness is caused by the recurrent
hyperglycemia of sugar gluttony. The experiments of Bernardo Houssay (1947
Nobel laureate) in the 1940s, in which sugar and coconut oil protected against
diabetes, followed by Randle's demonstration of the antagonism between fats
and glucose assimilation, and the growing recognition that polyunsaturated
fatty acids cause insulin resistance and damage the pancreas, have made it
clear that the dietetic obsession with sugar in relation to diabetes has been
a dangerous diversion that has retarded the understanding of degenerative
metabolic diseases.

Starting with the insulin industry, a culture of diabetes and sugar has been
fabulized and expanded and modified as new commercial industries found ways to
profit from it. Seed oils, fish oils, breakfast cereals, soybean products, and
other things that were never eaten by any animal in millions of years of
evolution have become commonplace as foods, even as health foods.

Although many things condition the rate at which blood sugar rises after
eating carbohydrates, and affect the way in which blood glucose is
metabolized, making the idea of a glycemic index highly misleading, it is
true that blood sugar and insulin responses to different foods have some
meaningful effects on physiology and health.

Starch and glucose efficiently stimulate insulin secretion, and that
accelerates the disposition of glucose, activating its conversion to glycogen
and fat, as well as its oxidation. **Fructose inhibits the stimulation of
insulin by glucose, so this means that eating ordinary sugar, sucrose (a
disaccharide, consisting of glucose and fructose), in place of starch, will
reduce the tendency to store fat.** Eating complex carbohydrates, rather
than sugars, is a reasonable way to promote obesity. Eating starch, by
increasing insulin and lowering the blood sugar, stimulates the appetite,
causing a person to eat more, so the effect on fat production becomes much
larger than when equal amounts of sugar and starch are eaten. The obesity
itself then becomes an additional physiological factor; the fat cells create
something analogous to an inflammatory state. There isn't anything wrong with
a high carbohydrate diet, and even a high starch diet isn't necessarily
incompatible with good health, but when better foods are available they should
be used instead of starches. For example, fruits have many advantages over
grains, besides the difference between sugar and starch. Bread and pasta
consumption are strongly associated with the occurrence of diabetes, fruit
consumption has a strong inverse association.

Although pure fructose and sucrose produce less glycemia than glucose and
starch do, the different effects of fruits and grains on the health can't be
reduced to their effects on blood sugar.

Orange juice and sucrose have a lower glycemic index than starch or whole
wheat or white bread, but it is common for dietitians to argue against the use
of orange juice, because its index is the same as that of Coca Cola. But, if
the glycemic index is very important, to be rational they would have to argue
that Coke or orange juice should be substituted for white bread.

After decades of education to promote eating starchy foods, obesity is a
bigger problem than ever, and more people are dying of diabetes than
previously. The age-specific incidence of most cancers is increasing, too, and
there is evidence that starch, such as pasta, contributes to breast cancer,
and possibly other types of cancer.

The epidemiology would appear to suggest that complex carbohydrates cause
diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. If the glycemic index is viewed in terms
of the theory that hyperglycemia, by way of glucotoxicity, causes the
destruction of proteins by glycation, which is seen in diabetes and old age,
that might seem simple and obvious.

|  |  
---|---|---  
  
Fructose | 32 | 22  
---|---|---  
Lactose | 65 | 46  
Honey | 83 | 58  
High fructose corn syrup | 89 | 62  
Sucrose | 92 | 64  
Glucose | 137 | 96  
Glucose tablets | 146 | 102  
Maltodextrin | 150 | 105  
Maltose | 150 | 105  
Pineapple juice | 66 | 46  
Peach, canned | 67 | 47  
Grapefruit juice | 69 | 48  
Orange juice | 74 | 52  
|  |  
Barley flour bread | 95 | 67  
Wheat bread, high fiber | 97 | 68  
Wheat bread, wholemeal flour | 99 | 69  
Melba toast | 100 | 70  
Wheat bread, white | 101 | 71  
Bagel, white | 103 | 72  
Kaiser rolls | 104 | 73  
Whole-wheat snack bread | 105 | 74  
Bread stuffing | 106 | 74  
Wheat bread, Wonderwhite | 112 | 78  
Wheat bread, gluten free | 129 | 90  
French baguette | 136 | 95  
Taco shells | 97 | 68  
Cornmeal | 98 | 69  
Millet | 101 | 71  
Rice, Pelde | 109 | 76  
Rice, Sunbrown Quick | 114 | 80  
Tapioca, boiled with milk | 115 | 81  
Rice, Calrose | 124 | 87  
Rice, parboiled, low amylose Pelde | 124 | 87  
Rice, white, low amylose | 126 | 88  
Rice, instant, boiled 6 min | 128 | 90  
|  |  
  
` |  |  
---|---|---  
  
GLYCEMIC LIST | **White Bread** | **Glucose Based**  
---|---|---  
  
  

But there are many reasons to question that theory.

Oxidation of sugar is metabolically efficient in many ways, including sparing
oxygen consumption. It produces more carbon dioxide than oxidizing fat does,
and carbon dioxide has many protective functions, including increasing Krebs
cycle activity and inhibiting toxic damage to proteins. The glycation of
proteins occurs under stress, when less carbon dioxide is being produced, and
the proteins are normally protected by carbon dioxide.

When sugar (or starch) is turned into fat, the fats will be either saturated,
or in the series derived from omega -9 monounsaturated fatty acids. When sugar
isn't available in the diet, stored glycogen will provide some glucose
(usually for a few hours, up to a day), but as that is depleted, protein will
be metabolized to provide sugar. If protein is eaten without carbohydrate, it
will stimulate insulin secretion, lowering blood sugar and activating the
stress response, leading to the secretion of adrenalin, cortisol, growth
hormone, prolactin, and other hormones. The adrenalin will mobilize glycogen
from the liver, and (along with other hormones) will mobilize fatty acids,
mainly from fat cells. Cortisol will activate the conversion of protein to
amino acids, and then to fat and sugar, for use as energy. (If the diet
doesn't contain enough protein to maintain the essential organs, especially
the heart, lungs, and brain, they are supplied with protein from the skeletal
muscles. Because of the amino acid composition of the muscle proteins, their
destruction stimulates the formation of additional cortisol, to accelerate the
movement of amino acids from the less important tissues to the essential
ones.)

The diabetic condition is similar in many ways to stress, inflammation, and
aging, for example in the chronic elevation of free fatty acids, and in
various mediators of inflammation, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF).

Rather than the sustained hyperglycemia which is measured for determining the
glycemic index, I think the diabetogenic or carcinogenic action of starch
has to do with the stress reaction that follows the intense stimulation of
insulin release. This is most easily seen after a large amount of protein is
eaten. Insulin is secreted in response to the amino acids, and besides
stimulating cells to take up the amino acids and convert them into protein,
the insulin also lowers the blood sugar. This decrease in blood sugar
stimulates the formation of many hormones, including cortisol, and under the
influence of cortisol both sugar and fat are produced by the breakdown of
proteins, including those already forming the tissues of the body. At the same
time, adrenalin and several other hormones are causing free fatty acids to
appear in the blood.

Since the work of Cushing and Houssay, it has been understood that blood sugar
is controlled by antagonistic hormones **:** Remove the pituitary along with
the pancreas, and the lack of insulin doesn't cause hyperglycemia. If
something increases cortisol a little, the body can maintain normal blood
sugar by secreting more insulin, but that tends to increase cortisol
production. A certain degree of glycemia is produced by a particular balance
between opposing hormones.

Tryptophan, from dietary protein or from the catabolism of muscles, is turned
into serotonin which activates the pituitary stress hormones, increasing
cortisol, and intensifying catabolism, which releases more tryptophan. It
suppresses thyroid function, which leads to an increased need for the stress
hormones. Serotonin impairs glucose oxidation, and contributes to many of the
problems associated with diabetes.

Diabetes is often the diagnosis, when excess cortisol is the problem. The
hormones have traditionally not been measured before diagnosing diabetes and
prescribing insulin or other chemical to lower the blood sugar. Some of the
worst effects of diabetes, including retinal damage, are caused or
exacerbated by insulin itself.

Antiserotonin drugs can sometimes alleviate stress and normalize blood sugar.
Simply eating sucrose was recently discovered to restrain the stress hormone
system (A new perspective on glucocorticoid feedback **:** relation to
stress, carbohydrate feeding and feeling better, J Neuroendocrinol 13(9),
2001, KD Laugero).

The free fatty acids released by the stress hormones serve as supplemental
fuel, and increase the consumption of oxygen and the production of heat. (This
increased oxygen demand is a problem for the heart when it is forced to
oxidize fatty acids. [A. Grynberg, 2001]) But if the stored fats happen to be
polyunsaturated, they damage the blood vessels and the mitochondria, suppress
thyroid function, and cause glycation of proteins. They also damage the
pancreas, and impair insulin secretion.

A repeated small stress, or overstimulation of insulin secretion, gradually
tends to become amplified by the effects of tryptophan and the polyunsaturated
fatty acids, with these fats increasing the formation of serotonin, and
serotonin increasing the liberation of the fats.

The name, glycation, indicates the addition of sugar groups to proteins,
such as occurs in diabetes and old age, but when tested in a controlled
experiment, **lipid peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids produces the
protein damage about 23 times faster than the simple sugars do** (Fu, et al.,
1996). And the oxidation of fats rather than glucose means that the proteins
won't have as much protective carbon dioxide combined with their reactive
nitrogen atoms, so the real difference in the organism is likely to be greater
than that seen by Fu, et al.

These products of lipid peroxidation, HNE, MDA, acrolein, glyoxal, and other
highly reactive aldehydes, damage the mitochondria, reducing the ability to
oxidize sugar, and to produce energy and protective carbon dioxide.

**Fish oil, which is extremely unstable in the presence of oxygen and metals
such as iron, produces some of these dangerous products very rapidly.** The
polyunsaturated essential fatty acids and their products, arachidonic acid
and many of the prostaglandin-like materials, also produce them.

When glucose can't be oxidized, for any reason, there is a stress reaction,
that mobiles free fatty acids. Drugs that oppose the hormones (such as
adrenalin or growth hormone) that liberate free fatty acids have been used to
treat diabetes, because lowering free fatty acids can restore glucose
oxidation.

Brief exposures to polyunsaturated fatty acids can damage the insulin-
secreting cells of the pancreas, and the mitochondria in which oxidative
energy production takes place. Prolonged exposure causes progressive damage.
Acutely, the free polyunsaturated fatty acids cause capillary permeability to
increase, and this can be detected at the beginning of insulin resistance or
diabetes. After chronic exposure, the leakiness increases and albumin occurs
in the urine, as proteins leak out of the blood vessels. The retina and brain
and other organs are damaged by the leaking capillaries.

The blood vessels and other tissues are also damaged by the chronically
increased cortisol, and at least in some tissues (the immune system is most
sensitive to the interaction) the polyunsaturated fats increase the ability of
cortisol to kill the cells.

When cells are stressed, they are likely to waste glucose in two ways, turning
some of it into lactic acid, and turning some into fatty acids, even while
fats are being oxidized, in place of the sugar that is available. Growth
hormone and adrenalin, the stress-induced hormones, stimulate the oxidation of
fatty acids, as well as their liberation from storage, so the correction of
energy metabolism requires the minimization of the stress hormones, and of the
free fatty acids. Prolactin, ACTH, and estrogen also cause the shift of
metabolism toward the fatty acids.

Sugar and thyroid hormone (T3, triiodothyronine) correct many parts of the
problem. The conversion of T4 into the active T3 requires glucose, and in
diabetes, cells are deprived of glucose. Logically, all diabetics would be
functionally hypothyroid. Providing T3 and sugar tends to shift energy
metabolism away from the oxidation of fats, back to the oxidation of sugar.

Niacinamide, used in moderate doses, can safely help to restrain the excessive
production of free fatty acids, and also helps to limit the wasteful
conversion of glucose into fat. There is evidence that diabetics are
chronically deficient in niacin. Excess fatty acids in the blood probably
divert tryptophan from niacin synthesis into serotonin synthesis.

Sodium, which is lost in hypothyroidism and diabetes, increases cellular
energy. Diuretics, that cause loss of sodium, can cause apparent diabetes,
with increased glucose and fats in the blood. **Thyroid, sodium, and glucose
work very closely together to maintain cellular energy and stability.**

In Houssay's experiments, sugar, protein, and coconut oil protected mice
against developing diabetes. The saturated fats of coconut oil are similar to
those we synthesize ourselves from sugar. Saturated fats, and the
polyunsaturated fats synthesized by plants, have very different effects on
many important physiological processes. In every case I know about, the
vegetable polyunsaturated fats have harmful effects on our physiology.

For example, they bind to the receptor proteins for cortisol, progesterone,
and estrogen, and to all of the major proteins related to thyroid function,
and to the vesicles that take up nerve transmitter substances, such as
glutamic acid.

They allow glutamic acid to injure and kill cells through excessive
stimulation; this process is similar to the nerve damage done by cobra venom,
and other toxins.

Excess cortisol makes nerve cells more sensitive to excitotoxicity, but the
cells are protected if they are provided with an unusually large amount of
glucose.

The cells of the thymus gland are very sensitive to damage by stress or
cortisol, but they too can be rescued by giving them enough extra glucose to
compensate for the cortisol. Polyunsaturated fatty acids have the opposite
effect, sensitizing the thymus cells to cortisol. This partly accounts for the
immunosuppressive effects of the polyunsaturated fats. (AIDS patients have
increased cortisol and polyunsaturated fatty acids in their blood.[E.A. Nunez,
1988.])

Unsaturated fatty acids activate the stress hormones, sugar restrains them.

Simply making animals deficient in the unsaturated vegetable oils (which
allows them to synthesize their own series of animal polyunsaturated fats,
which are very stable), protects them against autoimmune diabetes, and
against a variety of other immunological challenges. The essential fatty
acid deficiency increases the oxidation of glucose, as it increases the
metabolic rate generally.

Saturated fats improve the insulin-secreting response to glucose.

The protective effects of sugar, and the harmful effects of excessive fat
metabolism, are now being widely recognized, in every field of physiology. The
unsaturated vegetable fats, linoleic and linolenic acid and their derivatives,
such as arachidonic acid and the long chain fish oils, have excitatory, stress
promoting effects, that shift metabolism away from the oxidation of glucose,
and finally destroy the respiratory metabolism altogether. Since cell injury
and death generally involve an imbalance between excitation and the ability to
produce energy, it is significant that the oxidation of unsaturated fatty
acids seems to consume energy, lowering cellular ATP (Clejan, et al, 1986).

The bulk of the age-related tissue damage classified as glycation end-
products (or advanced glycation end-products, AGE) is produced by
decomposition of the polyunsaturated fats, rather than by sugars, and this
would be minimized by the protective oxidation of glucose to carbon dioxide.

Protein of the right kind, in the right amount, is essential for reducing
stress. Gelatin, with its antiinflammatory amino acid balance, helps to
regulate fat metabolism.

Aspirin's antiinflammatory actions are generally important when the
polyunsaturated fats are producing inflammatory and degenerative changes, and
aspirin prevents many of the problems associated with diabetes, reducing
vascular leakiness. It improves mitochondrial respiration (De Cristobal, et
al., 2002) and helps to regulate blood sugar and lipids (Yuan, et al., 2001).
Aspirin's broad range of beneficial effects is probably analogous to vitamin
E's, being proportional to protection against the broad range of toxic effects
of the polyunsaturated essential fatty acids.  

**REFERENCES**  

**Diabetes Care 1993 Sep;16(9):1301-5. Metabolic effects of dietary sucrose in
type II diabetic subjects. Bantle JP, Swanson JE, Thomas W, Laine DC
CONCLUSIONS--A high sucrose diet did not adversely affect glycemia or lipemia
in type II diabetic subjects.**

Am J Physiol 1997 Nov;273(5 Pt 1):C1732-8. **Glycolysis inhibition by
palmitate in renal cells cultured in a two-chamber system.** Bolon C, Gauthier
C, Simonnet H  palmitate promoted a long-term decrease in lactate production
and sustained excellent cellular growth. After 4 days of contact, decreased
glycolysis was maintained even in the absence of carnitine .

Diabetes 1989 Oct;38(10):1314-9. **Effects of fish oil supplementation on
glucose and lipid metabolism in NIDDM.** Borkman M, Chisholm DJ, Furler SM,
Storlien LH, Kraegen EW, Simons LA, Chesterman CN. Garvan  **In summary,
dietary fish oil supplementation adversely affected glycemic control in NIDDM
subjects without producing significant beneficial effects on plasma lipids.
The effect of safflower oil supplementation was not significantly different
from fish oil,** suggesting that the negative effects on glucose metabolism
may be related to the extra energy or fat intake. Randomized Controlled Trial

Ann Clin Lab Sci 1988 Jul-Aug;18(4):337-43. **Effects of peroxidized
polyunsaturated fatty acids on mitochondrial function and structure:
pathogenetic implications for Reye's syndrome.** Brown RE, Bhuvaneswaran C,
Brewster M.  **Linoleic acid, a polyunsaturated fatty acid, is a constituent
of margosa oil which has been implicated as a cause of Reye's syndrome (RS) in
infants. Increased concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids have been
found in sera from patients with RS. Isolated rat liver mitochondria exposed
to the** peroxidized (but not unperoxidized) methyl esters of linoleic (C18:2)
or linolenic (C18:3) acids showed decreases in state 3 and uncoupled
respiratory rates and in respiratory control and ADP/O ratios. In addition,
they caused mitochondrial swelling as demonstrated spectrophotometrically.
Between the two, the peroxidized methyl ester of linolenic acid was more toxic
and was capable of inducing high amplitude swelling ultrastructurally similar
to that seen in the hepatocytes of RS victims. The ability of rat liver
mitochondria to oxidize glutamate was inversely related to the peroxide
concentration in the medium.

J Neurochem 1982 Feb;38(2):525-31. **Phospholipid degradation and cellular
edema induced by free radicals in brain cortical slices.** Chan PH, Yurko M,
Fishman RA.  **These data suggest that lipases are activated by free radicals
and lipid peroxides in the pathogenesis of cellular swelling.**

J Neurochem 1988 Apr;50(4):1185-93. **Induction of intracellular superoxide
radical formation by arachidonic acid and by polyunsaturated fatty acids in
primary astrocytic cultures.** Chan PH, Chen SF, Yu AC. Other PUFAs,
including linoleic acid, linolenic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid, were also
effective in stimulating NBF formation in astrocytes, whereas saturated
palmitic acid and monounsaturated oleic acid were ineffective. Similar effects
of these PUFAs were observed in malondialdehyde formation in cells and lactic
acid accumulation in incubation medium. These data indicate that both membrane
integrity and cellular metabolism were perturbed by arachidonic acid and by
other PUFAs.

Can J Biochem 1978 Feb;56(2):111-6. **Uncoupling activity of endogenous free
fatty acids in rat liver mitochondria.** Chan SH, Higgins E Jr.

J Neurochem 1980 Oct;35(4):1004-7. **Transient formation of superoxide
radicals in polyunsaturated fatty acid-induced brain swelling.** Chan PH,
Fishman RA. The polyunsaturated fatty acids linoleic acid (18:2), linolenic
acid (18:3), arachidonic acid (20:4), and docosahexaenoic acid (22:6) caused
brain swelling concomitant with increases in superoxide and membrane lipid
**peroxidation. Palmitic acid (16:0) and oleic acid (18:1) had no such
effect.** These in vitro data support the hypothesis that both superoxide
radicals and lipid peroxidation are involved in the mechanism of
polyunsaturated fatty acid-induced brain edema.

Arch Biochem Biophys 1986 May 1;246(2):820-8. **Effect of growth hormone on
fatty acid oxidation: growth hormone increases the activity of 2,4-dienoyl-CoA
reductase in mitochondria.** Clejan S, Schulz H.  **Rates of respiration
supported by polyunsaturated fatty acylcarnitines, in contrast to rates
observed with palmitoylcarnitine or oleoylcarnitine, were slightly lower in
hypophysectomized rats than in normal rats, but were higher in
hypophysectomized rats treated with growth hormone. The effects were most
pronounced with docosahexaenoylcarnitine, the substrate with the highest
degree of unsaturation.** Since uncoupling of mitochondria with
2,4-dinitrophenol resulted in lower rates of docosahexaenoylcarnitine-
supported respiration, while substitution of ATP for ADP yielded higher rates,
it appears that **energy is required for the effective oxidation of
polyunsaturated** fatty acids. Growth hormone treatment of hypophysectomized
rats caused a threefold increase in t`he activity of 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase
or 4-enoyl-CoA reductase (EC 1.3.1.34) in mitochondria, but not in
peroxisomes. Rates of acetoacetate formation from linolenoylcarnitine, but
not from palmitoylcarnitine, were stimulated by glutamate in mitochondria from
hypophysectomized rats and hypophysectomized rats treated with growth hormone.
All data together **lead to the conclusion that the mitochondrial oxidation of
highly polyunsaturated fatty acids is limited by the availability of NADPH**
and the activity of 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase which is induced by growth
hormone treatment.

V. Coiro, et al., "Low-dose ovine corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation
test in diabetes mellitus with or without neuropathy," Metabolism--Clinical
and Experimental 44(4), 538-542, 1995. **"...basal and CRH-induced cortisol
levels were significantly higher in diabetics than in normal controls."
"...even uncomplicated diabetes mellitus is associated with adrenal
hyperfunction."**

Stroke 2002 Jan;33(1):261-7. **Inhibition of glutamate release via recovery of
ATP levels accounts for a neuroprotective effect of aspirin in rat cortical
neurons exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation.** De Cristobal J, Cardenas A,
Lizasoain I, Leza JC, Fernandez-Tome P, Lorenzo P, Moro MA. Aspirin is
preventive against stroke not only because of its antithrombotic properties
but also by other direct effects. Aspirin inhibited OGD-induced neuronal
damage at concentrations lower (0.3 mmol/L) than those reported to act via
inhibition of the transcription factor nuclear factor-kappaB (which are >1
mmol/L), an effect that **correlated with the inhibition caused by aspirin on
glutamate release.** This effect was shared by sodium salicylate but not by
indomethacin, thus excluding the involvement of cyclooxygenase. A
pharmacological dissection of the components involved indicated that aspirin
selectively inhibits the increase in extracellular glutamate concentration
that results from reversal of the glutamate transporter, a component of
release that is due to ATP depletion. Moreover, aspirin-afforded
neuroprotection occurred in parallel with a lesser decrease in ATP levels
after OGD. **Aspirin elevated ATP levels not only in intact cortical neurons
but also in isolated brain mitochondria, an effect concomitant with an
increase in NADH-dependent respiration by brain submitochondrial particles.**
Taken together, our present findings show a novel mechanism for the
neuroprotective effects of aspirin, which takes place at concentrations in the
antithrombotic-analgesic range, useful in the management of patients with high
risk of ischemic events.

Diabetes 2002 Jun;51(6):1825-33. **The composition of dietary fat directly
influences glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in rats.** Dobbins RL,
Szczepaniak LS, Myhill J, Tamura Y, Uchino H, Giacca A, McGarry JD. **Insulin
responses during hyperglycemic clamps were augmented by saturated but not
unsaturated fat (580 +/- 25, 325 +/- 30, and 380 +/- 50 pmol x l(-1) x min(-1)
in Lard, Soy, and Low-Fat groups, respectively).**  **These data indicate
that prolonged exposure to saturated fat enhances GSIS (but this does not
entirely compensate for insulin resistance), whereas unsaturated fat, given in
the diet or by infusion, impairs GSIS.**

C. Douillet and M. Ciavatti, **"Effect of vitamin E treatment on tissue fatty
acids and cholesterol content in experimental diabetes,"** J. Nutr. Biochem.
6(6), 319-326, 1995. **"Diabetes induced a decrease of monounsaturated fatty
acids and particularly palmitoleic acid in all studied tissues: liver, aorta,
plasma." C18:3 n-6 and C20:4 n-6 were increased by diabetes.**

Diabetologia 1992 Feb;35(2):165-72. **Long-term effects of linoleic-acid-
enriched diet on albuminuria and lipid levels in type 1 (insulin-dependent)
diabetic patients with elevated urinary albumin excretion.** Dullaart RP,
Beusekamp BJ, Meijer S, Hoogenberg K, van Doormaal JJ, Sluiter WJ. We
conducted a 2-year prospective randomised study to investigate the effects of
a linoleic-acid-enriched diet on albuminuria and lipid levels in Type 1
(insulin-dependent) diabetic patients with elevated urinary albumin excretion
(overnight urinary albumin excretion rate between 10 and 200 micrograms/min).
Clinical characteristics, **** albuminuria, blood pressure, glomerular
filtration rate, metabolic control and dietary composition were similar in the
two groups at baseline. In the high linoleic acid diet group, linoleic intake
rose from 7 +/- 4 to 11 +/- 2 energy % and polyunsaturated:saturated fatty
acids ratio rose from 0.60 +/- 0.28 to 0.96 +/- 0.16 (p less than 0.001
compared to usual diet group). The median increase albuminuria was 58% (95%
confidence interval, 13 to 109) during the first year (p less than 0.02) and
55% (95% confidence interval, 11 to 127) (p less than 0.01) during the second
year.

J Biol Chem 1996 Apr 26;271(17):9982-6. **The advanced glycation end product,
Nepsilon-(carboxymethyl) lysine, is a product of both lipid peroxidation and
glycoxidation reactions.** Fu MX, Requena JR, Jenkins AJ, Lyons TJ, Baynes JW,
Thorpe SR. Nepsilon-(Carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) is an advanced glycation end
product formed on protein by combined nonenzymatic glycation and oxidation
(glycoxidation) reactions. We now report that CML is also formed during metal-
catalyzed oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in the presence of protein.
During copper-catalyzed oxidation in vitro, the CML content of low density
lipoprotein increased in concert with conjugated dienes but was independent of
the presence **of the Amadori compound, fructoselysine, on the protein. CML
was also formed in a time-dependent manner in RNase incubated under aerobic
conditions in phosphate buffer containing arachidonate or linoleate; only
trace amounts of CML were formed from oleate. After 6 days of incubation the
yield of CML in RNase from arachidonate was approximately 0.7 mmol/mol lysine
compared with only 0.03 mmol/mol lysine for protein incubated under the same
conditions with glucose.** Glyoxal, a known precursor of CML, was also formed
during incubation of Rnase with arachidonate. These results suggest that lipid
peroxidation, as well as glycoxidation, may be an important source of CML in
tissue proteins in vivo and that CML may be a general marker of oxidative
stress and long term damage to protein in aging, atherosclerosis, and
diabetes.

J Nutr 2000 Oct;130(10):2503-7. **A high carbohydrate versus a high
monounsaturated fatty acid diet lowers the atherogenic potential of big VLDL
particles in patients with type 1 diabetes.** Georgopoulos A, Bantle JP,
Noutsou M, Hoover HA. A high (25%) monounsaturated fatty acid (Mono) diet and
a high (61%) carbohydrate (CHO) diet were provided for 4 wk in a randomized
crossover design to 19 normolipidemic, nonobese patients with type 1 diabetes.
The two diets were matched for protein, polyunsaturated/saturated fatty acids,
cholesterol and fiber content. We conclude that a high CHO diet might be
preferable to a high Mono diet, on the basis of the premise that more big VLDL
particles could increase the atherosclerotic risk in patients with diabetes.

J. Girard, "Role of free fatty acids in insulin resistance of subjects with
non-insulin-dependent diabetes," Diabetes Metab. 21(2), 79-88, 1995\.
**"Studies performed in the rat suggest that impaired glucose-induced insulin
secretion could also be related to chronic exposure of pancreatic beta cells
to elevated plasma free fatty acid levels."**

Ann Intern Med 1988 May;108(5):663-8. **Adverse metabolic effect of omega-3
fatty acids in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.** Glauber H, Wallace
P, Griver K, Brechtel G. Increased interest in using omega-3 fatty acids led
us to examine their metabolic effects in six men with type II (non-insulin-
dependent) diabetes mellitus. After 1 month of a diet supplemented with these
fatty acids, the patients' fasting glucose rose from 13.1 +/- 1.3 to 15.3 +/-
1.3 mmol/L (P = 0.03) and **glucose area during a mixed meal profile rose by
22% (P = 0.04). After omega-3 fatty acid withdrawal, fasting glucose
returned to baseline. Omega-3 fatty acid treatment in type II diabetes leads
to rapid but reversible metabolic deterioration, with elevated basal hepatic
glucose output and impaired insulin secretion** but unchanged glucose disposal
rates. Caution should be used when recommending omega-3 fatty acids in type II
diabetic persons.

A. Golay, et al., "Effect of lipid oxidation on the regulation of glucose
utilization in obese patients," Acta Diabetologica 32(1), 44-48, 1995. **[Free
fatty acids strongly and quickly depress the ability to oxidize or store
glucose.]**

Biol Neonate 1985;47(6):343-9. **Increased maternal-fetal transport of fat in
diabetes assessed by polyunsaturated fatty acid content in fetal lipids.**
Goldstein R, Levy E, Shafrir E. The distribution of fatty acids was determined
by gas-liquid chromatography in total lipid and triglyceride fraction of
extracts of several tissues of streptozotocin-diabetic rats and their fetuses
on day 20 of pregnancy. In maternal rats, diabetes did not significantly
affect fatty acid distribution apart from small changes in the relative
content of linoleate in adipose tissue and liver. In the placenta, the fetal
carcass and the fetal liver the **triglyceride content increased approximately
2-fold as a result of maternal diabetes, in association with the elevation in
triglycerides and free fatty** acids in the maternal circulation. A pronounced
increase in the relative content **of linoleate was recorded in the total
lipid and triglyceride extracts of placenta (35 and 59%), fetal carcass (56
and 66%) and fetal liver (100 and 205%). Small increases in arachidonate
proportion were also seen in some fetal tissues. The large increase in fetal
hepatic linoleate indicates that this** tissue is an important uptake target
of maternal lipids transported in excess into the fetus. The results confirm
the previous observations on increased transplacental fat passage in diabetes
by demonstrating that the increment in the essential fatty acid, linoleate,
parallels the diabetes-induced triglyceride accumulation in the fetoplacental
unit.  

A. Gomes, et al., "Anti-hyperglycemic effect of black tea (Camellia sinensis)
in rat," J. of Ethnopharmacology 45(3), 223-226, 1995. **It "was found to
possess both preventive and curative effects on experimentally produced
diabetes in rats."**

J Endocrinol 2002 Apr;173(1):73-80. **Acute effects of fatty acids on insulin
secretion from rat and human islets of Langerhans.** Gravena C, Mathias PC,
Ashcroft SJ. Long-chain fatty **acids (palmitate and stearate) were more
effective than medium-chain (octanoate). Saturated fatty acids (palmitate,
stearate) were more effective than unsaturated (palmitoleate, linoleate,
elaidate).**

Diabetes Metab 2001 Nov;27(5 Pt 2):S12-9. **[Modifications in myocardial
energy metabolism in diabetic patients]]** [Article in French] Grynberg A. 
**Because FA is the main heart fuel (although the most expensive one in
oxygen, and prompt to induce deleterious effects), this process is based on a
balanced fatty acid (FA) metabolism.** Several pathological situations are
associated with an accumulation of FA or derivatives, or with an excessive
b-oxidation. The diabetic cardiomyocyte is characterised by an over
consumption of FA. The control of the FA/glucose balance clearly appears as a
new strategy for cytoprotection, particularly in diabetes and requires a
reduced FA contribution to ATP production. Cardiac myocytes can control FA
mitochondrial entry, but display weak ability to control FA uptake, thus the
fate of non beta-oxidized FA appear as a new impairment for the cell. Sudden
death, hypercatecholaminemia, diabetes and heart failure have been associated
with an altered PUFA content in cardiac membranes.

Diabetologia 1996 Mar;39(3):251-5. **Acceleration of experimental diabetic
retinopathy in the rat by omega-3 fatty Acids.** Hammes HP, Weiss A, Fuhrer D,
Kramer HJ, Papavassilis C, Grimminger F. Omega-3 fatty acids exert several
important biological effects on factors that may predispose to diabetic
retinopathy. Potential pathogenetic mechanisms include platelet dysfunction,
altered eicosanoid production, increased blood viscosity in association with
impaired cell deformability and pathologic leucocyte/endothelium interaction.
Therefore, we tested whether a 6-month administration of fish oil (750 mg
Maxepa, 5 times per week), containing 14% eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and 10%
docosahexaenic acid, could inhibit the development of experimental retinopathy
of the streptozotocin-diabetic rat. The efficiency of fish oil supplementation
was evaluated by measuring EPA concentrations in total, plasma and membrane
fatty acids and by measuring the generation of lipid mediators (leukotrienes
and thromboxanes). Retinal digest preparations were quantitatively analysed
for pericyte loss, and the formation of acellular capillaries. Omega-3 fatty
acid administration to diabetic rats resulted in a twofold increase of EPA
20:5 in total fatty acids, and a reduction of the thromboxane ratio from 600
(untreated diabetic rats) to 50 (treated diabetic rats). Despite these
biochemical changes, diabetes-associated pericyte loss remained unaffected and
the formation of acellular, occluded capillaries was increased by 75% in the
fish oil treated diabetic group (115.1 +/- 26.8; untreated diabetic 65.2 +/-
15.0 acellular capillary segments/mm2 of retinal area). We conclude from this
study that dietary fish oil supplementation may be harmful for the diabetic
microvasculature in the retina.

Y. Hattori, et al., "Phorbol esters elicit Ca++-dependent delayed contractions
in diabetic rat aorta," Eur. J. Pharmacol. 279(1), 51-58, 1995. **[Diabetic
tissue is more responsive to activation of protein kinase C by phorbol
esters.]**

Nutr Metab 1975;18(1):41-8. **Adipose tissue metabolism in essential fatty
acid deficienty. Effects of prostaglandin e1, epinephrine, and ACTH.**
Hazinski TA, Barr M, Hertelendy F. In an effort to better define some of the
metabolic changes that accompany essential fatty acid deficiency (EFAD), we
studied glucose metabolism in adipose tissue of EFAD and normal mice under
basal conditions and in the presence of prostaglandin E1 (PGE1), epinephrine,
and ACTH1-18. Isolated fat cells were incubated in Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate
medium containing glucose 1(-14C) or 6(-14C), and the incorporation of
radioactive carbon into CO2, total fat, fatty acids, and glyceride-glycerol
was determined. **It was found that EFAD increased glucose uptake over
controls which could be attributed to increased oxidation to CO2 and fatty
acid synthesis. The contribution of the pentose cycle to glucose oxidation was
50-80% higher in EFAD adipocytes as compared to controls. ACTH1-18** (0.1
mug/ml) suppressed this by 18 and 30% in the control and EFAD groups,
respectively, while epinephrine decreased pentose cycle activity by 83 and 55%
in the two groups, respectively. PGE1 alone had no significant effect, but in
combination with epinephrine it abolished the inhibitory action of the
catecholamine in both groups.

J Neurosci Res 1989 Oct;24(2):247-50. **Brain mitochondrial swelling induced
by arachidonic acid and other long chain free fatty acids.** Hillered L, Chan
PH.  **Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), arachidonic acid in particular,
are well known, potent inducers of edema in the brain, while monounsaturated
and saturated long chain fatty acids do not possess this quality.**  **ATP-
MgCl2 both prevented and reversed this swelling, while binding of the 20:4 by
the addition of bovine serum albumin could only prevent but not reverse the
swelling. Moreover, reversal of the swelling occurred without recovery of
respiratory function.**

J Neurosci Res 1988 Aug;20(4):451-6. **Role of arachidonic acid and other free
fatty acids in mitochondrial dysfunction in brain ischemia.** Hillered L, Chan
PH.

B. A. Houssay and C. Martinez, **"Experimental diabetes and diet,"** Science
105, 548-549, 1947. **[Mortality was zero on the high coconut oil diet, 100%
on the high lard diet. It was 90% on the low protein diet, and 33% on the high
protein diet. With a combination of coconut oil and lard, 20%.]**

B. A. Houssay, et al., **"Accion de la administracion prolongada de glucosa
sobre la diabetes de la rata,"** Rev. Soc. argent. de biol. 23, 288-293, 1947.

S. Ikemoto, et al., **"High fat diet-induced hyperglycemia: Prevention by low
level expression of a glucose transporter (GLUT4) minigene in transgenic
mice,"** Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 92(8), 3096-3099, 1995. **"...mice fed a
high-fat (safflower oil) diet develop defective glycemic control,
hyperglycemia, and obesity."**

M. Inaba, et al., **"Influence of high glucose on 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D-3-induced effect on human osteoblast-like MG-63 cells,"** J. Bone Miner.
Res. 10(7), 1050-1056, 1995.

J. S. Jensen, et al., **"Microalbuminuria reflects a generalized transvascular
albumin leakiness in clinically healthy subjects,"** Clin. Sci. 88(6),
629-633, 1995.

J Am Geriatr Soc 1984 May;32(5):375-9. **Low triiodothyronine and raised
reverse triiodothyronine levels in patients over fifty years of age who have
type II diabetes mellitus: influence of metabolic control, not age.** Kabadi
UM, Premachandra BN. Several studies have demonstrated that the uncontrolled
diabetic state in both type I as well as type II diabetes mellitus is
characterized by altered thyroid hormone metabolism, which results in the
**lowering of serum triiodothyronine (T3) levels and a reciprocal elevation of
T3 (rT3) levels.** Serum T3 levels declined and rT3 levels rose in the
diabetic patients with worsening of the metabolic control.

Metabolism 1989 Mar;38(3):278-81. **The effect of fatty acids on the
vulnerability of lymphocytes to cortisol.** Klein A, Bruser B, Malkin A. We
have shown previously that cortisol-sensitive lymphocytes (thymocytes) have a
much lower capacity than cortisol-resistant cells to catabolize cortisol and
that **linoleic acid inhibits the catabolism of cortisol by lymphocytes and
modulates the sensitivity of lymphocytes to cortisol.**  Measuring the
effect of fatty acids on cortisol catabolism by lymphocytes indicated that
**the polyunsaturated fatty acids, linoleate, arachidonate, and
eicosapentaenoic, inhibit cortisol catabolism by lymphocytes. Examining the
effect of fatty acids on the vulnerability of lymphocytes to cortisol, we
noted that saturated fatty acids had no significant effect, whereas the
aforementioned polyunsaturated fatty acids make lymphocytes more sensitive to
cortisol.**

Jpn J Pharmacol 1978 Apr;28(2):277-87. **Relationship between cerebral energy
failure and free fatty acid accumulation following prolonged brain ischemia.**
Kuwashima J, Nakamura K, Fujitani B, Kadokawa T, Yoshida K, Shimizu M.
Mitochondria isolated from the ischemic brain showed an impairment of
oxidative phosphorylation. The ischemic **brain was also characterized by
remarkable accumulation of free fatty acids known to have properties as an
uncoupling factor. These results indicate that cerebral energy failure in
the ischemic brain is related to the accumulation of free fatty acids, which
are derived from endogenous brain lipids.**

Probl Endokrinol (Mosk) 1992 Nov-Dec; 38(6):53-4. **[Effect of protein content
in rat diet on water-soluble vitamin metabolism in streptozotocin-induced
diabetes]** [Article in Russian] Kodentsova VM, Sadykova RE, Dreval' AV,
Vrzhesinskaia OA, Sokol'nikov AA, Beketova NA. Water-soluble group B vitamins
metabolism was studied over the course of streptozotocin-induced diabetes
mellitus in rats fed semisynthetic isocaloric diets containing 18 and 50% of
protein. A high-protein diet in diabetes mellitus does not influence
riboflavin metabolism disordered in this disease but reduced 4-pyridoxyl acid
excretion to the level characteristic of healthy animals. The observed trend
to an increase of liver nicotinamide coenzymes levels and of
1-methylnicotinamide urinary excretion reflects increased niacin synthesis
from **the diet protein tryptophan, for niacin level is reduced in diabetes.**

M. Kusunoki, et al., **"Amelioration of high fat feeding-induced insulin
resistance in skeletal muscle with the antiglucocorticoid RU486,"** Diabetes
44(6), 718-720, 1995. **"These results suggest that glucocorticoids play, in a
tissue-specific manner, a role in the maintenance and/or production of insulin
resistance produced by high-fat feeding."**

J Neuroendocrinol 2001 Sep;13(9):827-35. **A new perspective on glucocorticoid
feedback: relation to stress, carbohydrate feeding and feeling better.**
Laugero KD. In this review, I discuss findings that have led us to view
glucocorticoid feedback in the HPA axis in a new light. Much of what has
precipitated this view comes from a very surprising finding in our laboratory;
sucrose ingestion normalizes feeding, energy balance and central corticotropin
releasing factor expression in adrenalectomized (ADX) rats. Taken together,
recent findings of the well-known importance of glucocorticoids to feeding and
energy balance, and the modulatory actions of carbohydrate ingestion on both
basal and stress-induced activity in the HPA axis, strongly suggest that many
metabolic (e.g. obesity) and psychological (e.g. depression) pathologies,
which often present together and have been associated with stress and HPA
dysregulation, might, in part, be understood in light of our new view of
glucocorticoid feedback.

Endocrinology 2001 Jul;142(7):2796-804. **Sucrose ingestion normalizes central
expression of corticotropin-releasing-factor messenger ribonucleic acid and
energy balance in adrenalectomized rats: a glucocorticoid-metabolic-brain
axis?** Laugero KD, Bell ME, Bhatnagar S, Soriano L, Dallman MF. Both CRF and
norepinephrine (NE) inhibit food intake and stimulate ACTH secretion and
sympathetic outflow. CRF also increases anxiety; NE increases attention and
cortical arousal. Adrenalectomy (ADX) changes CRF and NE activity in brain,
increases ACTH secretion and sympathetic outflow and reduces food intake and
weight gain; all of these effects are corrected by administration of adrenal
steroids. Unexpectedly, we recently found that ADX rats drinking sucrose, but
not saccharin, also have normal caloric intake, metabolism, and ACTH.
**Voluntary ingestion of sucrose restores CRF and dopamine-beta-hydroxylase
messenger RNA expression in brain, food intake, and caloric efficiency and fat
deposition, circulating triglyceride, leptin, and insulin to normal.**

A. Lazarow, "Protection against alloxan diabetes," Anat. Rec. 97, 353, 1947.

A. Lazarow, "Protective effect of glutathione and cysteine against alloxan
diabetes in the rat," Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. & Med. 61, 441-447, 1946. **[While
certain doses of cysteine, glutathione, and thioglycolic acid completely
prevented alloxan diabetes, it was interesting that all of the rats receiving
ascorbic acid became diabetic. To me, this argues for the free radical cause
of diabetes, rather than just the sulfhydryl oxidation. Lazarow suggested that
succinic dehydrogenase, and various other sulfhydryl enzymes, including those
involved in fatty acid oxidation, might be involved.]**

Minerva Endocrinol 1990 Oct-Dec;15(4):273-7. **[Postprandial thermogenesis and
obesity: effects of glucose and fructose].** [Article in Italian] Macor C, De
Palo C, Vettor R, Sicolo N, De Palo E, Federspil G. Energy expenditure was
calculated both in basal conditions and during the test (resting metabolic
rate: RMR) using indirect calorimetry expressed per kg of lean weight, as
assessed using bioimpedance measurement techniques. Blood samples were
collected to assay glycemia and insulinemia. Results show that increased RMR
induced by glucose was significantly reduced in the group of obese subjects
compared to controls. **In the same group of obese subjects, RMR was found to
be significantly higher following fructose in comparison to the glucose
response but did not differ from that in controls.** Data confirm the
existence of reduced thermogenesis in obese subjects induced by glucose. The
fact that this phenomenon was not recorded in the same subjects following the
fructose tolerance test, whose metabolism is insulin-independent, supports the
hypothesis that reduced glucose-induced thermogenesis in obese subjects may
depend on insulin resistance.

Diabetes Care 2000 Oct;23(10):1472-7. **Dietary unsaturated fatty acids in
type 2 diabetes: higher levels of postprandial lipoprotein on a linoleic acid-
rich sunflower oil diet compared with an oleic acid-rich olive oil diet.**
Madigan C, Ryan M, Owens D, Collins P, Tomkin GH.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990 Nov;87(22):8845-9. **Incorporation of marine
lipids into mitochondrial membranes increases susceptibility to damage by
calcium and reactive oxygen species: evidence for enhanced activation of
phospholipase A2 in mitochondria enriched with n-3 fatty Acids.** Malis CD,
Weber PC, Leaf A, Bonventre JV. Mitochondrial site 1 (NADH coenzyme Q
reductase) activity was reduced to 45 and 85% of control values in fish-oil-
and beef-tallow-fed groups, respectively. **Exposure to Ca2+ and reactive
oxygen species enhance the release of polyunsaturated fatty acids enriched at
the sn-2 position of phospholipids from mitochondria of fish-oil-fed rats when
compared with similarly treated mitochondria of beef-tallow-fed rats.** 
**Phospholipase A2 activity and mitochondrial damage are enhanced when
mitochondrial membranes are enriched with n-3 fatty acids.**

FEBS Lett 1998 Oct 16:437(1-2):24-8. **Generation of protein carbonyls by
glycoxidation and lipoxidation reactions with autoxidation products of
ascorbic acid and polyunsaturated fatty acids.** Miyata T, Inagi R, Asahi K,
Yamada Y, Horie K, Sakai H, Uchida K, Kurokawa K. In vitro incubation of
proteins with ascorbic acid accelerated the production of protein carbonyls as
well as CML and pentosidine, and incubation with arachidonate accelerated the
production of protein carbonyls as well as CML, MDA, and HNE. By contrast,
incubation of proteins with glucose resulted in the production of CML and
pentosidine, but not protein carbonyls. **The present study suggests that
ascorbate and polyunsaturated fatty acids, but not glucose, represent
potential sources of protein carbonyls, and that both the glycoxidation and
lipoxidation reactions contribute to protein carbonyl formation in aging and
various diseases.**

Chem Phys Lipids 1996 Jan 25;79(1):47-53. **Previously unknown aldehydic lipid
peroxidation compounds of arachidonic acid.** Mlakar A, Spiteller G. Lehrstuhl
fr Organische Chemie I, Arachidonic acid was oxidized by iron ascorbate. 
**The main aldehydic lipid peroxidation product was found to be the well-known
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE), but 2-hydroxy heptanal (HH) -- a previously unknown
lipid peroxidation product of arachidonic acid -- was detected to be nearly
equally abundant. Malondialdehyde (MDA), glyoxal and 2-hydroxy-4-decenal (HDE)
were detected to be produced in up to 100 times lower amounts compared to
HNE.. . . .** Since this and analogous hydroxy acids (LOHs) are the main
biological degradation **products of hydroperoxides of unsaturated acids
(LOOHs) their further peroxidation seems to be a main source of toxic
aldehydes.**

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000 Dec;85(12):4515-9. **Acute fructose
administration decreases the glycemic response to an oral glucose tolerance
test in normal adults.** Moore MC, Cherrington AD, Mann SL, Davis SN. In
animal models, a small (catalytic) dose of fructose administered with glucose
decreases the glycemic response to the glucose load.  **In conclusion, low
dose fructose improves the glycemic response to an oral glucose load in normal
adults without significantly enhancing the insulin or triglyceride response.
Fructose appears most effective in those normal individuals who have the
poorest glucose tolerance.**

Tumour Biol 1988;9(5):225-32. **Modulation of cell-mediated immune response by
steroids and free fatty acids in AIDS patients: a critical survey.** Nunez EA.
The overall data presented in this review show that cortisol and free fatty
acids, **in particular long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, each have
immunoinhibitory properties** on lymphoblastic transformation of certain T
lymphocytes. This effect is enhanced when the two factors are associated.
These data could explain in part the immunosuppression observed in acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients **where enhanced concentrations of
cortisol and polyunsaturated fatty acids have been observed**. These new
weapons could be the administration of diets or treatments (liposomes)
modifying the lipid profile of circulating cells and/or viruses and the
utilization of hormonal therapy in AIDS and in some types of cancer which
often present a biologic picture similar to that of AIDS.

Diabetes Care 1984 Sep-Oct;7(5):465-70. **Effect of protein ingestion on the
glucose and insulin response to a standardized oral glucose load.** Nuttall
FQ, Mooradian AD, Gannon MC, Billington C, Krezowski P. The plasma glucose
area above the baseline following a glucose meal was reduced 34% when protein
was given with the glucose. The insulin area following glucose was only
modestly greater than with a protein meal (97 +/- 35, 83 +/- 19 microU X h/ml,
respectively). When various amounts of protein were given with 50 g glucose,
the insulin area response was essentially first order. Subsequently, subjects
were given 50 g glucose or 50 g glucose with 50 g protein as two meals 4 h
apart in random sequence. The insulin areas were not significantly different
for each meal but were higher when protein + glucose was given. After the
second glucose meal the plasma glucose area was 33% less than after the first
meal. Following the second glucose + protein meal the plasma glucose area was
markedly reduced, being only 7% as large as after the first meal. **These data
indicate that protein given with glucose will increase insulin secretion and
reduce the plasma glucose rise in at least some type II diabetic persons.**
Randomized Controlled Trial

Biochem J 1985 Sep 1;230(2):329-37. **Inhibitory effects of some long-chain
unsaturated fatty acids on mitochondrial beta-oxidation. Effects of
streptozotocin-induced diabetes on mitochondrial beta-oxidation of
polyunsaturated fatty acids.** Osmundsen H, Bjornstad K. **Evidence showing
that some unsaturated fatty acids, and in particular docosahexaenoic acid, can
be powerful inhibitors of mitochondrial beta-oxidation is presented. This
inhibitory property is, however, also observed with the cis- and trans-isomers
of the C18:1(16) acid. Hence it is probably the position of the double
bond(s), and not the degree of unsaturation, which confers the inhibitory
property. It is suggested that the inhibitory effect is caused by accumulation
of 2,4-di- or 2,4,7-tri-enoyl-CoA esters in the mitochondrial matrix.**

Free Radic Biol Med 1999 Oct;27(7-8):901-10. **Thyroid status modulates
glycoxidative and lipoxidative modification of tissue Proteins.** Pamplona R,
Portero-Otin M, Ruiz C, Bellmunt MJ, Requena JR, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW, Romero
M, Lopez-Torres M, Barja G. Steady state protein modification by carbonyl
compounds is related to the rate of carbonyl adduct formation and the half-
life of the protein. **Thyroid hormones are physiologic modulators of both
tissue oxidative stress and protein degradation.** **The levels of the
glycation product** N(epsilon)-fructoselysine (FL) and those of the
**oxidation products,** N(epsilon)-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) and
**malondialdehyde-lysine** (MDA-lys), identified by GC/MS in liver proteins,
**decreased significantly in hyperthyroid rats,** as well as (less acutely) in
hypothyroid animals. Immunoblotting of liver proteins for advanced glycation
end-products (AGE) is in agreement with the results obtained by GC/MS.
Cytosolic proteolytic activity against carboxymethylated foreign proteins
measured in vitro was significantly increased in hypo- and hyperthyroidism.
Oxidative damage to DNA, estimated as 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine
(8oxodG), did not show significant differences between groups. The results
suggests that the steady state levels of these markers depend on the levels of
thyroid hormones, presumably through their **combined effects on the rates of
protein degradation and oxidative stress,** whereas DNA is more protected from
oxidative damage.

Metabolism 1999 Mar;48(3):406-9. **The blood vessel, linchpin of diabetic
lesions.** Plante GE, Alfred J, Chakir M. The morbidity and mortality
associated with diabetes mellitus are essentially related to the vascular
lesions that develop over time in this condition. Both the macrocirculation
and microcirculation are involved, and as a consequence, vital organs such as
the brain, retina, heart, and kidney and the limbs become damaged. Changes
in the structure of conduit arteries, partly responsible for the alteration in
compliance characteristics, could well be related to the way these arteries
are fed by the vasa vasorum system. Preliminary results indicate that the
size of terminal arterioles of the vasa vasorum (increased diameter) and the
capillary permeability to albumin (markedly enhanced) in this specialized
network are profoundly affected in the thoracic aorta obtained from diabetic
animals. Albumin extravasation into the interstitial fluid compartment of the
aorta is likely to lead to structural and physicochemical changes: in fact,
removal of interstitial macromolecules via lymphatic drainage is poor in the
blood vessel wall of large arteries.

Metabolism 2001 Dec;50(12):1472-8. **Serum phospholipid fatty acid composition
and insulin action in type 2 diabetic patients.** Pelikanova T, Kazdova L,
Chvojkova S, Base J. **Increased contents of highly unsaturated n-6 family FA
(P <.01), arachidonic acid in particular . . . were found in all groups of
diabetics compared with HS [healthy subjects],** while lower levels of
linoleic acid were seen in DMN (P <.001) and DMH (P <.05). The contents of
saturated FA and monounsaturated FA were comparable in HS, DMN, and DMD.

J Clin Invest 2002 Mar;109(6):805-15. **Acute intensive insulin therapy
exacerbates diabetic blood-retinal barrier breakdown via hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha and VEGF.** Poulaki V, Qin W, Joussen AM, Hurlbut P, Wiegand SJ,
Rudge J, Yancopoulos GD, Adamis AP. Here we demonstrate that acute intensive
insulin therapy markedly increases VEGF mRNA and protein levels in the retinae
of diabetic rats. Blood-retinal barrier breakdown is markedly increased with
acute intensive insulin therapy. . . .  **To our knowledge, these data are
the first to identify a specific mechanism for the transient worsening of
diabetic retinopathy, specifically blood-retinal barrier breakdown, that
follows the institution of intensive insulin therapy.**

Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 1992 Apr;126(4):378-80. **Lipid peroxidation in early
experimental diabetes in rats: effects of diabetes and insulin.** Rungby J,
Flyvbjerg A, Andersen HB, Nyborg K. In the kidney, lipid **peroxidation was
increased after one week of diabetes; insulin treatment reduced the level of
lipid peroxidation to levels lower than seen in controls. In the liver,
diabetes caused an increased lipid peroxidation, which could be reversed by
insulin; no additional effect of insulin was found. In heart and pancreas no
effects of diabetes or insulin were demonstrated. The present paper provides**
evidence that lipid peroxidation is increased in the early stages of
**experimental diabetes and is reversible by insulin treatment.
Hyperinsulinaemia may, in itself, counteract lipid peroxidation in kidney.**

Br J Nutr 1997 Sep;78(3):459-67. **Influence of dietary protein and fat on
serum lipids and metabolism of essential fatty acids in rats.** Ratnayake WM,
Sarwar G, Laffey P. A In general, the concentrations of serum
triacylglycerols and **total cholesterol and liver phospholipid levels of
arachidonic acid (AA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) were higher in rats fed
on casein diets compared with those fed on the gelatin diets. These effects
were more pronounced in rats fed** on the high-casein (300 g/kg)-high-fat (150
g/kg) diet. **Gelatin was hypocholesterolaemic and also suppressed the liver
phospholipid levels of AA and DHA (reported for the first time).** The
difference in the amino acid composition between casein and gelatin may be
responsible for the observed effects. Casein contains higher levels of
glutamic acid, methionine, phenylalanine and tyrosine, while gelatin contains
higher levels of arginine, glycine and hydroxyproline.

Br Med J 1979 Jun 30;1(6180):1753-6. **Improved glucose control in maturity-
onset diabetes treated with high-carbohydrate-modified fat diet.** Simpson RW,
Mann JI, Eaton J, Moore RA, Carter R, Hockaday TD. Fourteen patients with
established maturity-onset diabetes were treated as outpatients with a high-
carbohydrate-(about 60% of total daily energy requirements)-modified fat diet
(ratio of polyunsaturated fatty acids to other fatty acids greater than or
equal to 1:1) for six weeks. **The findings suggest that it is no longer
justifiable to prescribe a low-carbohydrate diet for maturity-onset
diabetes.**

Postgrad Med J 1981 Aug;57(670):511-5. **Severe hypertriglyceridaemia
responding to insulin and nicotinic acid therapy.** Smith SR. Treatment with
insulin and restriction of dietary carbohydrate led to a 50% reduction in the
triglyceride concentration, and the addition of nicotinic acid in modest doses
led ultimately to a complete normalization of the patient's lipid values. A
close correlation **was noted between the falling triglyceride concentration
and the rising serum sodium concentration during the course of successful
therapy. Overall, it is felt likely that this patient's severe and reversible
hypertriglyceridaemia was on the basis of excessively rapid lipolysis**
leading to high concentrations of very low density lipoprotein production.

Am J Clin Nutr 1993 Nov;58(5 Suppl):766S-770S. **Fructose and dietary
thermogenesis.** Tappy L, Jequier E.  **Fructose ingestion induces a greater
thermogenesis than does glucose. This can be explained by the hydrolysis of
3.5-4.5 mol ATP/mol fructose stored as glycogen, vs 2.5 mol ATP/mol glucose
stored. Therefore the large thermogenesis of fructose corresponds essentially
to an increase in obligatory thermogenesis.** Obese individuals and obese
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus commonly have a decrease
in glucose-induced thermogenesis. **These individuals in contrast display a
normal thermogenesis after ingestion of fructose.** This may be explained by
the fact that the initial hepatic fructose metabolism is independent of
insulin.

Diabetes 2002 Jun;51(6):1772-8. **Inhibition of interleukin-1beta-induced
COX-2 and EP3 gene expression by sodium salicylate enhances pancreatic islet
beta-cell function.** Tran PO, Gleason CE, Robertson RP.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 Apr 28;95(9):4882-7. **Protein-bound acrolein:
potential markers for oxidative stress.** Uchida K, Kanematsu M, Sakai K,
Matsuda T, Hattori N, Mizuno Y, Suzuki D, Miyata T, Noguchi N, Niki E, Osawa
T. Acrolein (CH2==CH---CHO) is known as a ubiquitous pollutant in the
environment. **Here we show that this notorious aldehyde is not just a
pollutant, but also a lipid peroxidation product that could be ubiquitously
generated in biological systems. Upon incubation with BSA, acrolein was
rapidly incorporated into the protein and generated the protein-linked
carbonyl derivative, a putative marker of oxidatively modified proteins under
oxidative stress. ** Immunohistochemical analysis of atherosclerotic lesions
from a human aorta demonstrated that antigenic materials recognized by mAb5F6
indeed constituted the lesions, in which intense positivity was associated
primarily with macrophage-derived foam cells and the thickening neointima of
arterial walls. **The observations that (i) oxidative modification of low-
density lipoprotein with Cu2+ generated the acrolein-low-density lipoprotein
adducts and (ii) the iron-catalyzed oxidation of arachidonate in the presence
of protein** resulted in the formation of antigenic materials suggested that
**polyunsaturated fatty acids are sources of acrolein that cause the
production of protein-bound acrolein. These data suggest that the protein-
bound acrolein represents potential markers of oxidative stress and long-term
damage to protein in aging, atherosclerosis, and diabetes.**

J Intern Med 1990 Aug;228(2):165-71. **Dietary supplementation with n-3 fatty
acids may impair glucose homeostasis in patients with non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus.** Vessby B, Boberg M. The blood glucose concentration
**tended to increase during MaxEPA treatment, and to decrease during the
placebo period, the changes under the two regimes being significantly
different (P less than 0.01). In addition, the rate constant for glucose
disappearance (k value) for the intravenous insulin-tolerance test, which
reflected the peripheral insulin sensitivity, tended to decrease during MaxEPA
treatment and increase** during administration of the placebo, there being a
significant difference (P less than 0.03) between the changes during the two
treatments. The reason for the observed changes in blood glucose concentration
and peripheral insulin sensitivity is still unclear.

Diabet Med 1992 Mar;9(2):126-33. **Polyunsaturated fatty acids may impair
blood glucose control in type 2 diabetic Patients.** Vessby B, Karlstrom B,
Boberg M, Lithell H, Berne C.  **Average blood glucose concentrations during
the third week were significantly higher fasting (+15%, p less than 0.01), and
during the day at 1100 h (+18%, p less than 0.001) and 1500 h (+17%, p =
0.002) on PUFA than on the saturated fat diet.**

Drugs 1999;58 Suppl 1:31-9; discussion 75-82. **The antihyperglycaemic effect
of metformin: therapeutic and cellular mechanisms.** Wiernsperger NF, Bailey
CJ Other effects involved in the blood **glucose-lowering effect of metformin
include an insulin-independent suppression of fatty acid oxidation and a
reduction in hypertriglyceridaemia. These effects reduce the energy supply for
gluconeogenesis and serve to balance the glucose-fatty acid (Randle) cycle.**

J Biol Chem 2001 Mar 30;276(13):9800-7. **Polyunsaturated fatty acids suppress
hepatic sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 expression by accelerating
transcript decay.** Xu J, Teran-Garcia M, Park JH, Nakamura MT, Clarke SD.
Our initial studies **indicated that the induction of SREBP-1 expression by
insulin and glucose was blocked by PUFA. Nuclear run-on assays suggested PUFA
reduced SREBP-1 mRNA by** post-transcriptional mechanisms.  **Although the
mechanism by which PUFA accelerate SREBP-1 mRNA decay** remains to be
determined, cloning and sequencing of the 3'-untranslated region for the rat
SREBP-1 transcript revealed the presence of an A-U-rich region that is
characteristic of a destablizing element.

Recent Adv Stud Cardiac Struct Metab 1976 May 26-29;12:271-7. **Arrhythmogenic
effects of acute free fatty acid mobilization on ischemic heart.** Yamazaki N,
Suzuki Y, Kamikawa T, Ogawa K, Mizutani K, Kakizawa N, Yamamoto M.

Science 1978 Jul 28;201(4353):358-60. **Brain edema: induction in cortical
slices by polyunsaturated fatty acids.** Chan PH, Fishman RA The presence of
polyunsaturated and saturated fatty acids in leukocytic membranes prompted
study of their possible role in the induction of brain edema. Polyunsaturated
fatty acids including sodium arachidonate, sodium linoleate, sodium
linolenate, and docasahexaenoic acids induced edma in slices of rat brain
cortex. **This cellular edema was specific, since neither saturated fatty
acids nor a fatty acid containing a single double bond had such effect.**

J Neurochem 1986 Oct;47(4):1181-9. **Effects of arachidonic acid on glutamate
and gamma-aminobutyric acid uptake in primary cultures of rat cerebral
cortical astrocytes and neurons.** Yu AC, Chan PH, Fishman RA. Arachidonic
acid inhibited glutamate uptake in both astrocytes and neurons. The inhibitory
effect was observed within 10 min of incubation with arachidonic acid and
reached approximately 80% within 120 min in both types of culture. The
arachidonic acid effect was not only time-dependent, but also dose-related.
Arachidonic acid, at concentrations of 0.015 and 0.03 mumol/mg protein,
significantly inhibited glutamate uptake in neurons, whereas 20 times higher
concentrations were required for astrocytes. The effects of arachidonic acid
were not as deleterious on GABA uptake as on glutamate uptake in both
astrocytes and neurons.  **Other polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as
docosahexaenoic acid, affected amino acid uptake in a manner similar to
arachidonic acid in both astrocytes and neurons. However, saturated fatty
acids, such as palmitic acid, exerted no such effect.**

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

