![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Heart and hormones**  
  
The heart's unique behavior has given cardiologists a particularly mechanical
perspective on biology. If a cardiologist and an oncologist have anything to
talk about, it's likely to be about why cancer treatments cause heart failure;
a cardiologist and an endocrinologist might share an interest in
"cardioprotective estrogen" and "cardiotoxic obesity." Cell physiology and
bioenergetics aren't likely to be their common interest. Each specialty has
its close involvement with the pharmaceutical industry, shaping its thinking.

The drug industry has been lowering the numbers for cholesterol, blood
pressure, and blood glucose that are considered to be the upper limit of
normal, increasing the number of customers for their prescription drugs.
Recently, publications have been claiming that the upper limit of the normal
range of heart rates should be lower than 100 beats per minute; this would
encourage doctors to prescribe more drugs to slow hearts, but the way the
evidence is being presented, invoking the discredited "wear and tear" theory
of aging, could have many unexpected harmful consequences. It would reinforce
existing misconceptions about heart functions.  
  
A few decades ago, diuretics to lower blood pressure and digitalis/digoxin to
increase the heart's strength of contraction were the main treatments for
heart disease. In 1968, the annual number of deaths in the US from congestive
heart failure (in which the heart beats more weakly, pumping less blood) was
10,000. By 1993 the number had increased to 42,000 per year. More recently,
the annual number of deaths in which heart failure is the primary cause was
more than 55,000. During these decades, many new drugs for treating heart
disease were introduced, and the use of digoxin has decreased slightly. People
with heart failure usually live with the condition for several years; at
present about 5.7 million people in the US live with heart failure. The
prevalence of, and mortality from, other cardiovascular diseases (such as
hypertension and abnormalities of the coronary arteries) are higher, but
congestive heart failure is especially important to understand, because it
involves defective function of the heart muscle itself.  
  
Although Albert Szent-Gyorgyi is known mostly for his discovery of vitamin C
and his contribution to understanding the tricarboxylic acid or Krebs cycle,
his main interest was in understanding the nature of life itself, and he
focused mainly on muscle contraction and cancer growth regulation. In one of
his experiments, he compared the effects of estrogen and progesterone on
rabbit hearts. A basic property of the heart muscle is that when it beats more
frequently, it beats more strongly. This is called the staircase effect, from
the way a tracing of its motion rises, beat by beat, as the rate of
stimulation is increased. This is a logical way to behave, but sometimes it
fails to occur: In shock, and in heart failure, the pulse rate increases,
without increasing the volume of blood pumped in each contraction.  
  
Szent-Gyorgyi found that estrogen treatment decreased the staircase effect,
while progesterone treatment increased the staircase. He described the
staircase as a situation in which function (the rate of contraction) builds
structure (the size of the contraction). Progesterone allowed "structure" to
be built by the contraction, and estrogen prevented that.  
(It's interesting to compare these effects of the hormones to the more general
idea of anabolic and catabolic hormones, in which more permanent structures in
cells are affected.)  
  
The rapid and extensive alternation of contraction and relaxation made
possible by progesterone is also produced by testosterone (Tsang, et al.,
2009). Things that increase the force of contraction are called inotropic, and
the things that promote relaxation are called lusitropic; progesterone and
testosterone are both positively inotropic and lusitropic, improving
contraction and relaxation. Estrogen is a negative lusitropic hormone (Filice,
et al., 2011), and also a negative inotropic hormone (Sitzler, et al., 1996),
that is, it impairs both relaxation and contraction.  
  
Another standard term describing heart function is chronotropy, referring to
the frequency of contraction. Because of the staircase interaction of
frequency and force, there has been some confusion in classifying drugs
according to chronotropism. In a state of shock or estrogen dominance, an
inotropic drug will slow the heart rate by increasing the amount of blood
pumped. This relationship caused digitalis' effect to be thought of as
primarily slowing the rate of contraction (Willins and Keys, 1941), though its
main effect is positively inotropic. It was traditionally used to treat edema,
by stimulating diuresis, which is largely the result of its inotropic action.
Progesterone and testosterone's inotropic action can also slow the heart beat
by strengthening it.  
  
I think it was a little before Szent-Gyorgyi's heart experiment that Hans
Selye had discovered that a large dose of estrogen created a shock-like state.
Shock and stress cause estrogen to increase, and decrease progesterone and
testosterone.  
  
About 30 years after Szent-Gyorgyi's work, people began to realize that
digoxin and other heart stimulating molecules can be found in animals and
humans, as metabolites of progesterone and possibly DHEA (Somogyi, et al.,
2004).  
  
The regulatory proteins that are involved in estrogen's negative lusi- and
inotropic actions (decreasing pumping action) have been known for over 20
years to be regulated by the thyroid hormone to produce positive lusi- and
inotropic actions on the heart (increasing its pumping action), and thyroid's
beneficial effects on heart and skeletal muscle have been known empirically
for 100 years. However, drug centered cardiologists, reviewing the currently
available drugs approved by the FDA, have typically concluded that "drugs
targeted to achieve these objectives are not available" (Chatterjee, 2002).  
  
When a muscle or nerve is fatigued, it swells, retaining water. When the
swelling is extreme, its ability to contract is limited. Excess water content
resembles a partly excited state, in which increased amounts of sodium and
calcium are free in the cytoplasm. Energy is needed to eliminate the sodium
and calcium, or to bind calcium, allowing the cell to extrude excess water and
return to the resting state. Thyroid hormone allows cells' mitochondria to
efficiently produce energy, and it also regulates the synthesis of the
proteins (phospholamban and calcisequestrin) that control the binding of
calcium. When the cell is energized, by the mitochondria working with thyroid,
oxygen, and sugar, these proteins rapidly change their form, binding calcium
and removing it from the contractile system, allowing the cell to relax, to be
fully prepared for the next contraction. If the calcium isn't fully and
quickly bound, the cell retains extra water and sodium, and isn't able to
fully relax.  
  
Heart failure is described as "diastolic failure" when the muscle isn't able
to fully relax. In an early stage, this is just a waterlogged (Iseri, et al.,
1952), fatigued condition, but when continued, the metabolic changes lead to
fibrosis and even to calcification of the heart muscle.  
  
Many children approaching puberty, as estrogen is increasing and interfering
with thyroid function, have "growing pains," in which muscles become tense and
sore after prolonged activity. When hypothyroidism is severe, it can cause
myopathy, in which the painful swollen condition involves the leakage of
muscle proteins (especially myoglobin) into the blood stream, allowing it to
be diagnosed by a blood test. The combination of hypothyroidism with fatigue
and stress can lead to the breakdown and death of muscle cells,
rhabdomyolysis.  
  
The blood lipid lowering drugs, statins and fibrates, impair mitochondrial
respiration (Satoh, et al., 1995, 1994; Brunmair, et al., 2004), and increase
the incidence of rhabdomyolysis (Barker, et al., 2003; Wu, et al., 2009;
Fallah, et al., 2013). Interference with coenzyme Q10 is not the only
mechanism by which they can cause myopathy (Nakahara, et al., 1998). The
harmful effect of lowering cholesterol seems to be relevant to heart failure:
"In light of the association between high cholesterol levels and improved
survival in HF, statin or other lipid-lowering therapy in HF remains
controversial (Horwich, 2009).  
  
Heart muscle and skeletal muscle are similar in their structural responses to
interference with mitochondrial functions, namely, swelling, reduced
contractile ability, and dissolution. When myoglobin has been found in the
blood and urine, it has been assumed to come from skeletal muscles, but the
heart's myoglobin has been found to be depleted in a patient with
myoglobinuria (Lewin and Moscarello, 1966). When heart failure is known to
exist, similar changes can be found in the skeletal muscles (van der Ent, et
al., 1998).  
  
Stress, in the form of pressure-overload (Zhabyeyev, et al., 2013), or
overactivity of the renin-angiotensin system (Mori, et al., 2013) and
sympathetic nervous system or adrenergic chemicals (Mori, et al., 2012), or a
failure of energy caused by diabetes, insulin deficiency, or hypothyroidism,
causes a shift of energy production from the oxidation of glucose to the
oxidation of fatty acids, with the release, rather than oxidation, of the
lactic acid produced from glucose. This sequence, from reduced efficiency of
energy production to heart failure, can be opposed by agents that reduce the
availability of fatty acids and promote the oxidation of glucose. Niacinamide
inhibits the release of free fatty acids from the tissues, and thyroid
sustains the oxidation of glucose. This principle is now widely recognized,
and the FDA has approved a drug that inhibits the oxidation of fatty acids
(raloxazine, 2006), but which has serious side effects. Glucose oxidation
apparently is necessary for preventing the intracellular accumulation of free
calcium and fatty acids (Jeremy, et al., 1992; Burton, et al., 1986; Ivanics,
et al., 2001). The calcium binding protein which is activated by thyroid and
inhibited by estrogen seems to be activated by glucose and inhibited by fatty
acids (Zarain-Herzberg and Rupp, 1999).  
  
Diabetes or fasting increases free fatty acids, and forces cells to shift from
oxidation of glucose to oxidation of fatty acids, inhibiting the binding of
calcium (McKnight, et al., 1999). Providing a small amount of sugar (0.8%
sucrose in their drinking water) restored the calcium binding and heart
function, without increasing either thyroid hormone or insulin (Rupp, et al.,
1988, 1999, 1994). Serum glucose was lowered, as the ability to oxidize sugar
was restored by lowering free fatty acids. Activity of the sympathetic nervous
system is lowered as efficiency is increased.  
  
Digoxin stimulates mitochondrial energy production in skeletal and heart
muscle (Tsyganil, et al., 1982), increasing the oxidation of glucose, rather
than fatty acids, supporting the effect of thyroid hormone. The statins have
the opposite effect, decreasing the oxidation of glucose.  
  
One of estrogen's effects is to chronically increase the circulation of free
fatty acids, and to favor the long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as
EPA and DHA. These fatty acids, which slow the heart rate (Kang and Leaf,
1994), extend the excited state (action potential: Li, et al., 2011), and are
negatively inotropic (Dhein, et al., 2005; Macleod, et al., 1998; Negretti, et
al., 2000), are being proposed as heart protective drugs. (EPA and alpha-
linoleic acid also prolong the QT interval: Dhein, et al., 2005).  
  
Many publications still promote estrogen as a cardioprotective drug, but there
is now increased recognition of its role in heart failure and sudden cardiac
death. A prolonged excited state (action potential) and delayed relaxation (QT
interval) are known to increase the risk of arrhythmia and sudden death, and
estrogen, which causes those changes in humans, causes sudden cardiac death in
susceptible rabbits, with an adrenergic stimulant increasing the arrhythmias,
and progesterone and androgen preventing them (Odening et al., 2012).
Progesterone's protective effect seems to be the result of accelerating
recovery of the resting state (Cheng, et al., 2012).  
  
Estrogen's interactions with adrenalin in promoting blood vessel constriction
has been known for many years (for example, Cheng and Gruetter, 1992).
Progesterone blocks that effect of estrogen (Moura and Marcondes, 2001).
Environmental estrogens such as BPA can exacerbate ventricular arrhythmia
caused by estrogen (Yan, et al., 2013). The hearts of mice genetically
engineered to lack aromatase, the enzyme that synthesizes estrogen, were more
resistant to damage by being deprived of blood for 25 minutes (Bell, et al.,
2011), leading the authors to suggest that aromatase inhibition might be
helpful for heart disease.  
  
In the stressed, energy depleted failing heart, muscle cells die and are
replaced by connective tissue cells. The growth produced by over-exposure to
adrenergic stimulation leads to stiffening and reduced functioning. However,
under the influence of thyroid hormone a high work load leads to functional
enlargement, which simply increases the pumping ability. Because of the
traditional belief that heart cells can't replicate, this functional growth
was believed to be produced purely by the enlargement of cells, but in recent
years the existence of stem cells able to create new heart muscle has been
recognized. Thyroid is likely to be one of the hormones responsible for
allowing stem cells to differentiate into cardiomyocytes.  
  
In this context, of cellular differentiation as a life-long process, we can
see the changes of a failing heart as a differentiation which is forced to
take an inappropriate course. The calcification of blood vessels caused by
phosphate excess and vitamin K deficiency involves the expression of a protein
which has its proper place in the skeleton. The replacement of heart muscle by
fibrous connective tissue and even bone is a basic biological problem of
differentiation, and the responsible factors--stress, increased estrogen,
deficient thyroid hormone, suppression of glucose oxidation by fatty acids,
etc.--are involved in the problems of differentiation that occur in other
degenerative processes, such as sarcopenia, dementia, and cancer.  
  
There have been arguments about the nature of wound healing and regeneration,
regarding the origin of the new cells--whether they are from the
dedifferentiation of local cells, or the migration of stem cells. The evidence
is that both can occur, depending on the tissue and the situation. The
deterioration of an organ is probably not a question of a lack of stem cells,
but of changed conditions causing them to differentiate into something
inappropriate for the full functioning of that organ.  
  
Various stresses can cause cells to dedifferentiate, but hypoxia is probably a
common denominator. In the absence of estrogen, hypoxia can activate the
"estrogen receptor." Estrogen is in some situations a hormone of
dedifferentiation, facilitating the formation of new cells in stressed
tissues, as aromatase is induced. However, the presence of polyunsaturated
fats, tending to increase in concentration with age, causes the processes of
renewal to produce exaggerated inflammation, with prostaglandins participating
in the processes of development and differentiation. Estrogen, by increasing
the concentration of free fatty acids, especially polyunsaturated fatty acids,
contributes to the metabolic shift away from glucose oxidation, toward the
formation of lactic acid, and away from the full organ-specific
differentiation.  
  
This perspective puts heart failure, cancer, and the other degenerative
diseases onto the same biological basis, and shows why certain conditions and
therapies can be appropriate for all of them.  
  
Problems that seem relatively trivial become more meaningful when they are
seen in terms of these mechanisms. Some problems that become very common by
middle age are "palpitations," orthostatic hypotension, orthostatic
tachycardia, and varicose veins. The negative inotropic effect of estrogen in
the heart has a parallel in the smooth muscle of veins, in which the muscles
are weakened, and their distensibility increased, when estrogen isn't
sufficiently opposed by progesterone. This allows the veins in the lower part
of the body to be distended abnormally when standing, reducing the amount of
blood returning to the heart, so that the volume pumped with each stroke is
small, requiring faster beating. The reduced blood volume reaching the brain
can cause fainting. When it becomes chronic, it can lead to the progressive
distortion of the veins. An excess of estrogen is associated with varicose
veins in men, as well as women. (Raj, 2006; Ciardullo, et al., 2000; Kendler,
et al., 2009; Asciutto, et al., 2010; Raffetto, et al., 2010).  
  
The simplicity of things such as supplementing thyroid, progesterone, and
sugar, avoiding an excess of phosphate in relation to calcium, and avoiding
polyunsaturated fats, makes it possible for people to take action themselves,
without having to depend on the medical system. Most physicians still warn
their patients of the dangers of thyroid supplements, especially the active T3
hormone, for their heart, but in at least one specialty, its value is
recognized. Heart transplant surgeons have discovered that administering T3 to
the brain-dead heart donor before removing the heart improves its viability
and function in the recipient (Novitzky, 1996). Around this time, the
manufacturers of Cytomel conceived the idea of marketing it as a "heart drug,"
which would make it much more profitable.  
  
Another technique that is easy to use to lower blood pressure and improve
heart rhythm is to breathe into a paper bag for a minute or two at a time, to
increase the carbon dioxide content of the blood. This has a vasodilating
effect, reducing the force required to circulate the blood, and reduces
anxiety. Rhubarb and emodin (a chemical found in rhubarb and cascara) have
been found to have heart protective actions. A considerable amount of research
showed that vitamin K is effective for treating hypertension, but again, most
doctors warn against its use, because of its reputation as a clot forming
vitamin. Recently, the value of the "blood thinner" warfarin, a vitamin K
antagonist, has been questioned for people with heart failure (An, et al.,
2013; Lee, et al., 2013). There have been several recent warnings about the
production of arrhythmia by drugs that increase serotonin's effects (e.g.,
Stillman, et al., 2013).  
  
Measuring the speed of relaxation of the Achilles tendon reflex twitch is a
traditional method for judging thyroid function, because in hypothyroidism the
relaxation is visibly delayed. This same retardation can be seen in the
electrocardiogram, as a prolonged QT interval, which is associated with
arrhythmia and sudden death. Insomnia, mania, and asthma are other conditions
in which defective relaxation is seen, under the influence of low thyroid
function, and an insufficiently opposed influence of estrogen.  
  
REFERENCES  
  
J Pathol. 2000 Aug;191(4):434-42. Expression of nitric oxide synthase isoforms
and arginase in normal human skin and chronic venous leg ulcers. Abd-El-Aleem
SA, Ferguson MW, Appleton I, Kairsingh S, Jude EB, Jones K, McCollum CN,
Ireland GW.  
  
PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e57661. The occurrence of warfarin-related nephropathy and
effects on renal and patient outcomes in korean patients. An JN, Ahn SY, Yoon
CH, Youn TJ, Han MK, Kim S, Chin HJ, Na KY, Chae DW.  
  
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2010 Jul;40(1):117-21. Oestradiol levels in varicose
vein blood of patients with and without pelvic vein incompetence (PVI):
diagnostic implications. Asciutto G, Mumme A, Asciutto KC, Geier B.  
  
Diabetes Care August 2003 vol. 26 no. 8 2482-2483. Fenofibrate Monotherapy
Induced Rhabdomyolysis. Barker BJ, Goodenough RR, Falko JM.  
  
Endocrinology. 2011 Dec;152(12):4937-47. Aromatase deficiency confers
paradoxical postischemic cardioprotection. Bell JR, Mellor KM, Wollermann AC,
Ip WT, Reichelt ME, Meachem SJ, Simpson ER, Delbridge LM.  
  
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2004 Oct;311(1):109-14. Fenofibrate impairs rat
mitochondrial function by inhibition of respiratory complex I. Brunmair B,
Lest A, Staniek K, Gras F, Scharf N, Roden M, Nohl H, Waldhäusl W, Fürnsinn C.  
  
Am J Geriatr Cardiol. 2002;11(3). Primary Diastolic Heart Failure, Chatterjee
K.  
  
Eur J Pharmacol. 1992 May 14;215(2-3):171-6. Chronic estrogen alters
contractile responsiveness to angiotensin II and norepinephrine in female rat
aorta. Cheng DY, Gruetter CA.  
  
Eur J Pharmacol. 2012 Aug 15;689(1-3):172-8. Frequency-dependent acceleration
of cardiac repolarization by progesterone underlying its cardiac protection
against drug-induced proarrhythmic effects in female rabbits. Cheng J, Zhang
J, Ma X, Su D.  
  
J Vasc Surg. 2000 Sep;32(3):544-9. High endogenous estradiol is associated
with increased venous distensibility and clinical evidence of varicose veins
in menopausal women. Ciardullo AV, Panico S, Bellati C, Rubba P, Rinaldi S,
Iannuzzi A, Cioffi V, Iannuzzo G, Berrino F.  
  
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2005 Mar;371(3):202-11. Antiarrhythmic
and electrophysiological effects of long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids. Dhein S, Michaelis B, Mohr FW. "All compounds exhibited a negative
inotropic and chronotropic effect."  
  
Australas Med J. 2013 Mar 31;6(3):112-4. Life-threatening rhabdomyolysis
following the interaction of two commonly prescribed medications. Fallah A,
Deep M, Smallwood D, Hughes P.  
  
Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2009 Sep;11(5):343-9. Low-density lipoprotein in the
setting of congestive heart failure: is lower really better? Horwich T.  
  
Am Heart J. 1952 Feb;43(2):215-27. Water and electrolyte content of cardiac
and skeletal muscle in heart failure and myocardial infarction. ISERI LT,
ALEXANDER LC, McCAUGHEY RS, BOYLE AJ, MYERS GB.  
  
Mol Cell Biochem. 2001 Oct;226(1-2):119-28. Concomitant accumulation of
intracellular free calcium and arachidonic acid in the ischemic-reperfused rat
heart. Ivanics T, Miklós Z, Dézsi L, Ikrényi K, Tóth A, Roemen TH, Van der
Vusse GJ, Ligeti L.  
  
Circ Res. 1992 Jun;70(6):1180-90. Relation between glycolysis and calcium
homeostasis in postischemic myocardium. Jeremy RW, Koretsune Y, Marban E,
Becker LC.  
  
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Oct 11;91(21):9886-90. Effects of long-chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids on the contraction of neonatal rat cardiac
myocytes. Kang JX, Leaf A.  
  
Angiology. 2009 Jun-Jul;60(3):283-9. Elevated serum estradiol/testosterone
ratio in men with primary varicose veins compared with a healthy control
group. Kendler M, Blendinger Ch, Haas E.  
  
Circ Heart Fail. 2013 Mar;6(2):287-92. Risk-benefit profile of warfarin versus
aspirin in patients with heart failure and sinus rhythm: a meta-analysis. Lee
M, Saver JL, Hong KS, Wu HC, Ovbiagele B.  
  
Can Med Assoc J. 1966 Jan 15;94(3):129-31. Cardiac myoglobin in myoglobinuria.  
Lewin PK, Moscarello MA.  
  
Lipids. 2011 Feb;46(2):163-70. Increasing DHA and EPA concentrations prolong
action potential durations and reduce transient outward potassium currents in
rat ventricular myocytes. Li HX, Wang RX, Li XR, Guo T, Wu Y, Guo SX, Sun LP,
Yang ZY, Yang XJ, Jiang WP.  
  
J Appl Physiol. 1999 Nov;87(5):1909-13. Biphasic changes in heart performance
with food restriction in rats. McKnight KA, Rupp H, Dhalla KS, Beamish RE,
Dhalla NS.  
  
Eur J Pharmacol. 1998 Sep 4;356(2-3):261-70. The electrical and mechanical
response of adult guinea pig and rat ventricular myocytes to omega3
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Macleod JC, Macknight AD, Rodrigo GC.  
  
Circulation: Heart Failure. 2012; 5: 493-503. Agonist-Induced Hypertrophy and
Diastolic Dysfunction Are Associated With Selective Reduction in Glucose
Oxidation. A Metabolic Contribution to Heart Failure With Normal Ejection
Fraction. Mori J, Basu R, McLean BA, Das SK, Zhang L, Patel VB, Wagg CS,
Kassiri Z, Lopaschuk GD, Oudit GY.  
  
Life Sci. 2001 Jan 12;68(8):881-8. Influence of estradiol and progesterone on
the sensitivity of rat thoracic aorta to noradrenaline. Moura MJ, Marcondes
FK.  
  
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Sep;152(1):99-106. Myopathy induced by HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitors in rabbits: a pathological, electrophysiological, and
biochemical study. Nakahara K, Kuriyama M, Sonoda Y, Yoshidome H, Nakagawa H,
Fujiyama J, Higuchi I, Osame M.  
  
J Physiol. 2000 Mar 1;523 Pt 2:367-75. Inhibition of sarcoplasmic reticulum
function by polyunsaturated fatty acids in intact, isolated myocytes from rat
ventricular muscle.  
Negretti N, Perez MR, Walker D, O'Neill SC.  
  
Thyroid 1996 Oct;6(5):531-6. Novel actions of thyroid hormone: the role of  
triiodothyronine in cardiac transplantation. Novitzky D  
  
Heart Rhythm. 2012 May;9(5):823-32. Estradiol promotes sudden cardiac death in
transgenic long QT type 2 rabbits while progesterone is protective. Odening
KE, Choi BR, Liu GX, Hartmann K, Ziv O, Chaves L, Schofield L, Centracchio J,
Zehender M, Peng X, Brunner M, Koren G.  
  
J Vasc Surg. 2010 Apr;51(4):972-81. Estrogen receptor-mediated enhancement of
venous relaxation in female rat: implications in sex-related differences in
varicose veins. Raffetto JD, Qiao X, Beauregard KG, Khalil RA.  
  
Indian Pacing Electrophysiol. J. 2006;6(2):84-99.The Postural Tachycardia
Syndrome (POTS): Pathophysiology, Diagnosis & Management. Raj SR  
  
Mol Cell Biochem. 1994 Mar 16;132(1):69-80. Modification of myosin isozymes
and SR Ca(2+)-pump ATPase of the diabetic rat heart by lipid-lowering
interventions. Rupp H, Elimban V, Dhalla NS.  
  
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Oct 16;164(1):319-25. Diabetes-like action of
intermittent fasting on sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-pump ATPase and myosin
isoenzymes can be prevented by sucrose. Rupp H, Elimban V, Dhalla NS.  
  
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1988 Oct 31;156(2):917-23. Sucrose feeding
prevents changes in myosin isoenzymes and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-pump
ATPase in pressure-loaded rat heart. Rupp H, Elimban V, Dhalla NS.  
  
Br J Pharmacol. 1995 Sep;116(2):1894-8. Effects of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A reductase inhibitors on mitochondrial respiration in ischaemic dog
hearts.  
Satoh K, Yamato A, Nakai T, Hoshi K, Ichihara K.  
  
Eur J Pharmacol. 1994 Aug 3;270(4):365-9. Influence of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors on mitochondrial
respiration in rat liver during ischemia. Satoh K, Nakai T, Ichihara K.  
  
Br J Pharmacol. 1997 Oct;122(4):772-8. Imbalance between the endothelial cell-
derived contracting factors prostacyclin and angiotensin II and nitric
oxide/cyclic GMP in human primary varicosis. Schuller-Petrovic S, Siedler S,
Kern T, Meinhart J, Schmidt K, Brunner F.  
  
J Clin Invest. 1996 Nov 15;98(10):2244-50. Glucose plus insulin regulate fat
oxidation by controlling the rate of fatty acid entry into the mitochondria.
Sidossis LS, Stuart CA, Shulman GI, Lopaschuk GD, Wolfe RR.  
  
Orv Hetil. 2004 Feb 8;145(6):259-66. [New steroid hormone family: endogenous
cardiac glycosides and their role in physiologic and pathologic conditions].
[Article in Hungarian] Somogyi J, Szalay J, Pándics T, Rosta K, Csermely P,
Vér A.  
  
Headache. 2013 Jan;53(1):217-24. QT prolongation, Torsade de Pointes,
myocardial ischemia from coronary vasospasm, and headache medications. Part 2:
review of headache medications, drug-drug interactions, QTc prolongation, and
other arrhythmias. Stillman MJ, Tepper DE, Tepper SJ, Cho L.  
  
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Apr;296(4):C766-82. Testosterone-augmented
contractile responses to alpha1- and beta1-adrenoceptor stimulation are
associated with increased activities of RyR, SERCA, and NCX in the heart.
Tsang S, Wong SS, Wu S, Kravtsov GM, Wong TM.  
  
Farmakol Toksikol. 1982 Jan-Feb;45(1):30-2. [Effect of digoxin, strophanthin
and isolanid on oxygen absorption, oxidative phosphorylation and the amount of
cytochromes in the myocardial mitochondria and their ATPase activity].
TsyganiÄ­ AA, Medvinskaia NA, Rudenko AF.  
  
Eur Heart J. 1998 Jan;19(1):124-31. A non-invasive selective assessment of
type I fibre mitochondrial function using 31P NMR spectroscopy. Evidence for
impaired oxidative phosphorylation rate in skeletal muscle in patients with
chronic heart failure. van der Ent M, Jeneson JA, Remme WJ, Berger R,
Ciampricotti R, Visser F.  
  
Withering W. An account of the foxglove and some of its medical uses, with
practical remarks on dropsy, and other diseases. In Willins FA, Keys TE, eds.
Classics of Cardiology. Volume I. New York, NY: Henry Schuman, Dover
Publications; 1941: 231–252.  
  
Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Dec;65(12):1169-74. Rhabdomyolysis associated with
fibrate therapy: review of 76 published cases and a new case report. Wu J,
Song Y, Li H, Chen J.  
  
Cardiovasc Res (2013) 97 (4): 676-685. Pressure-overload-induced heart failure
induces a selective reduction in glucose oxidation at physiological afterload.
Zhabyeyev P, Gandhi M, Mori J, Basu R., Kassiri Z, Clanachan A., Lopaschuk GD,
Oudit GY.

  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2015. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

