![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
How do you know? Students, patients, and discovery**  

For the real world has inexhaustible splendour, the real life is full of
meaning and abundance, where we grasp it, it is full of miracles and glory.
_N. Hartmann_

"I am myself plus my circumstances" _Jose Ortega y Gasset_  

Knowledge should be useful and provisional.

I think comparing the doctor-patient relationship with the teacher-student
relationship can be useful, and it might suggest ways that both of them could
be made more productive, with implications for the nature of learning and
knowing.

40 or 50 years ago, advocates of student-centered education were encouraged by
the popularity of psychologist Carl Rogers' client centered therapy. Rogers
was interested in what made some therapists successful, and he found that
their personality and attitude, not their theories or techniques, accounted
for their success. Successful therapists had three essential traits. They
offered their clients acceptance or unconditional positive regard and
empathic understanding, and they themselves were congruent, not presenting a
facade of authority or esoteric knowledge. According to Rogers, accurate
diagnosis and specific treatment didn't have anything to do with helping
the client.

Some therapists thought Rogers' approach was impractical, others were sure it
was foolish. Medically oriented psychiatrists saw Roger's prestige among
psychologists as evidence that psychology wasn't suited for dealing with the
mentally ill, who needed authoritative diagnosis and treatment--such as
drugs, convulsive shock, or surgery. Scientifically, however, Rogers' ideas
were supported by evidence, and medical psychiatry had no evidence to support
many of its diagnostic concepts or their therapeutic usefulness.

Most university professors felt that Rogers' ideas were irrelevant to their
educational work, and some clearly saw their own function as being a sort of
Malthusian selection of the fittest, and deliberately designed their classes
as barriers that only a few could surmount.

When I taught English composition, instructors were told that they must grade
according to a standard scoring system for errors of grammar, punctuation,
spelling, and diction. Our success was seen in terms of the number of freshmen
who had dropped out by the end of the year, as evidence that the department
had high standards. Knowing that system, most students chose to write in the
style of the first grade See Spot run readers, hoping that they could handle
the mechanics of writing if they reduced the complexity and content of their
essays. It didn't work, and they didn't improve during the weeks when their
mistakes were being brought painfully to their attention. Since I hated
reading their meaningless efforts, I told them that I was going to grade them
on content, rather than punctuation and spelling, and that they should try to
write about something that was important to them. Only their success in
communicating something would be graded. Their papers became more readable,
and the interesting thing was that the mechanical things improved immediately.
(The intention to communicate something is the real source of structure in
language.) I had another teacher score some of their compositions, and he
confirmed that they had improved according to the department's system. The
attempt to steer a person can make it hard for them to move, because it
inactivates their own guidance system.

A physics professor would notice that writing classes have a lot in common
with psychotherapy, and would dismiss the possibility that such an approach
could be used in serious education.

Professors of medicine see themselves as models of the authority that their
students will need to apply in dealing with patients, and the physicians
trained in the authoritarian style are likely to see their patients as
recipients of their medical knowledge, rather than as occasions for listening
and learning something new.

Students entering these disciplines must expect to be disciplined. This means
that they learn not to ask silly questions about the fundamental assumptions
of their profession. Their common sense of meaning, their original guidance
system, must be inactivated to keep them from asking questions such as is
that a disease or a theory? Some patients find that their physician has
little patience for their questions, but most patients don't want to ask
questions, because they have been taught to respect the authorities.

Our nervous systems are made up of physiology and culture.

That can be a philosophical problem, because our experience is governed by our
composition. In people like Heraclitus, physiology was in the foreground, and
in people like Plato, culture was in the foreground. (Heraclitus understood
that things are always becoming, Plato believed that change wasn't real.) To
change someone's mind, it's necessary to change the way they experience
themselves and the world, and that requires changing their substance.

In the 1950s a group called Synectics was formed to study the creative
process. They found that having an expert in the group could be useful, but it
could also often stifle the group's ability to find a good solution to a
problem. W.J.J. Gordon described their method as "trusting things that are
alien, and alienating things that are trusted." They used metaphorical
thinking to help them to see the complexity and potentiality of a situation,
and to go beyond the existing understanding.

Professors and physicians too often present themselves as having definitive
knowledge about a subject. For people who already have definitive knowledge
about something, anomalous facts (if they are perceived at all) will simply
remain anomalous and will be quickly forgotten. The things they produce will
be extensions of what already exists. For others, things that aren't easily
explained have special interest, and cause them to ask new questions. New
perspectives can lead to new possibilities and new realities.

Once during a lecture, Alfred Korzybski offered his students some cookies,
which they seemed to enjoy, then he showed them a label on the bag, dog
cookies, and some of them felt sick. "I have just demonstrated that people
don't just eat food, but also words, and that the taste of the former is often
outdone by the taste of the latter." Hypnotists have often demonstrated that
words can have physiological effects.

Many of our institutions use language as a system for preserving culture, that
is, for preventing change. Korzybski wanted to correct the cultural habit of
making abstractions seem like objects or elements, by making people aware of
the degree of abstraction in their words. This can be useful, but his book has
been used to promote an extreme linguistic relativism in the theory of
knowledge and science, placing meaning entirely within the nervous system.

This approach evades the fact that patterns exist objectively, and that they
can be perceived as they unfold through time. Although Korzybski thought he
was teaching people to overcome the limitations of thinking in the style of
Aristotle or Plato, he was supporting an attitude that would make it
impossible to perceive in the style of Heraclitus.

If Heraclitus said it's impossible to step in the same river twice, his
comment was directed to those who ignore the rich complexity of experience
because of stereotyped elemental thinking. He was pointing to the abundance
of the world, but elemental-concept thinkers have felt that he simply negated
their objective meanings.

To perceive another person accurately requires the ability to perceive the
person as a pattern unfolding coherently through time, as a potential
realizing itself. Carl Rogers' insight was that one's awareness of being
perceived in this way encourages the unfolding of potentials.

The refusal of institutions or individuals to perceive others in this way is
an imposition of their way of understanding, and is itself a form of
oppression. People who think in terms of professional training often
describe learning in terms of conditioned reflexes, producing a desired
response to each stimulus.

The terms conditioned reflex and conditioning were introduced into
psychology by the behaviorist J. B. Watson, who mistranslated and
misrepresented Pavlov's ideas, and who insisted that the ideas of
consciousness, volition, and self should be eliminated from the science of
psychology.

The orienting reflex, the alertness provoked by something new, was described
by Sechenov in 1863, and explored by Pavlov (who also called it the what _is_
that? reflex and the exploration reflex) who considered it to be our most
basic and most powerful reflex. The fact that novelty powerfully arouses our
exploratory systems means that we have a mental image of our familiar
environment, and that a change in that environment requires us to investigate
the properties of the new thing, to see whether it can be explained by the
things we already know, or whether it requires us to change our basic ideas
about our place in our surroundings. For Pavlov, the study of psychology or
physiology without consciousness was simply crazy.

Pavlov said that he studied nutrition to understand consciousness and the
nervous system, because eating is our closest interaction with the world. Our
brain is part of our digestive system. But eating has become highly
institutionalized and influenced by our cultural beliefs. If people begin to
think about the meanings of eating, they are beginning a process of cultural
and philosophical criticism.

Helping people with physical problems (such as obesity, headaches or joint or
nerve pain, or named diseases) and helping people who want to understand
something about the world beyond themselves, are structurally similar, but in
the issues of health the questions and the potential answers are more clearly
present and immediate.

The Synectics group began with the study of artistic creation, but they found
that it was easier to evaluate their progress when they concentrated on
technical invention. They found, as Pavlov had, that consciousness and meaning
could best be studied in concrete situations. The process of goal-seeking was
to be studied in action.

I see the therapeutic or educational or productive situation as a goal-
directed biological and social interaction, and the goal can be either the
creation of something new and better, or simply the preservation and
application of something already existing.

Until just about a generation ago, teleology (especially in biological
explanation) was considered to be metaphysical and inappropriate for science.
Norbert Wiener, who coined the word cybernetics (from Greek for proficient
pilot or good steersman) helped to change attitudes toward the word when he
used the phrase teleological mechanism to describe cybernetic control
systems.

A goal-directed system is one that senses its actions and makes adaptations so
that its actions can be refined to achieve a purpose. Between 1932 and 1935, a
student and colleague of Pavlov's, P.K. Anokhin, developed this idea of self-
regulating systems, and originated the concept of feedback, in describing the
ways organisms guide themselves and their adaptations. Building on Pavlov's
work, and investigating the origins of innate reflexes, he found principles
that would explain the origin of organs and their functions, and that would
also apply to the interactions between individuals. The functional system on
any level, in embryology, psychology, or society, is a sequence of
interactions with a useful result. Movement towards a goal is adaptive, and
the system is shaped by the adaptations it makes in moving toward the goal.
Resources are mobilized to meet needs, changing the system as it moves towards
its goal.

Since there is always novelty in the real world as contexts change, the
exploratory function is causing us to continually revise our understanding.
Every question forms a functional system, and our brain adapts as we find
answers.

This kind of systems theory and self-regulation theory developed along with
the field theories in embryology, psychology, chemistry, and some branches of
physics. Pattern and analogy were central to their approach. The functional
systems are processes that occupy time and space.

The field idea in biology (wholes shaping themselves) can be understood by
considering its opposite, the belief that cells are guided by their genes
(producing a mosaic of parts). That idea, in its extreme form, claimed that
cells contained an internal map and an internal clock telling them when and
where to move and how to change their form and function as they matured and
aged. In reality, cells communicate with surrounding cells and with the
material between cells. The existence of long-range ordering processes between
atoms, molecules, and cells threatened some of the central dogmas of the
sciences.

Although Norbert Wiener popularized some aspects of the teleological
approach to regulatory systems in the 1950s, and saw analogies between the
teleological machines and the way the brain functions in Parkinson's disease,
by 1950 the digital approach to information processing, storage, and
transmission was displacing analog devices in computation and engineering, and
was compatible with theories of intelligence, such as neo-Kantianism, that
believed that human intelligence can be defined precisely, in terms of
discrete rules and operations. Field thinking in embryology, cancer theory,
psychology, and other sciences effectively disappeared--or was disappeared,
for ideological reasons.

Wiener's goal-directed machines, like Anokhin's functional systems, worked in
space and time, and the idea of steering or guidance assumes a context of time
and space in which the adjustments or adaptations are made. Analog computers
and control systems in various ways involved formal parallels with reality.
The components of the system, like reality, occupied space and time.

Digital computers, with their different history and functions, for example
their use for creating or breaking military codes, didn't intrinsically model
reality in any way. Information had to be encoded and processed by systems of
definitions. A sequence of binary digits has meaning only in terms of
someone's arbitrary definitions.

Parallel with the development of electronic digital computing machines, binary
digital theories of brain function were being developed, by people who
subscribed to views of knowledge very different from those of Anokhin and
Wiener. (Anokhin argued against the idea that nerves use a simple binary
code.) These computer models of intelligence justify educational practices
based on authoritative knowledge and conditioned (arbitrary) reflexes. Neo-
Kantianism has been the dominant academic philosophy in the U.S., turning
philosophy into epistemology to exclude ontology. "Operationism" and logical
positivism share with neo-Kantianism its elimination of ontology (concern with
being itself).

In the 1960s, Ludwig von Bertalanffy developed a theory of systems, defining a
system as an arrayed multitude of inter-linked elements. Although it was
intended as a description of biological systems, it reduced the teleological
factors, needs and goals, to a kind of mechanical inner program, such as
regulatory genes. Following old modes of thought, some called this
orderliness of life 'purposiveness' and sought for the 'purpose' of an organ
or function. However, in the concept of a 'purpose' a desiring or intending of
the goal always appeared to be involved--the type of idea to which the natural
scientist is justly unsympathetic (von Bertalanffy).

His system theory was highly compatible with programmed digital computers,
that could define the interactions of elements, but unlike Anokhin's
definition of functional systems, it lacked a pattern-forming mechanism. In
Anokhin's view, the system is formed by seeking its goal, and perceiving its
progress toward the goal.

Carl Rogers' approach to person-centered processes recognized that the
interacting therapist and client or teacher and student were a formative
system, rather than just an occasion for one to inform the other.

In the Synectics group, they learned to identify the types of deeply involved
interaction that would lead to the best inventions. As in Anokhin's functional
systems, resources are mobilized or generated as they are needed. Like
Anokhin, they showed that the process of creating something new can be
understood and controlled.

Every meaningful interaction involves formative systems.

Stimulation of sensory nerves can cause cells to move into the stimulated
area, causing the organ to grow. Environmental enrichment causes brains to
become larger, and to metabolize at a higher rate. All of these processes,
from the level of energy production to the birth of new cells and the creation
of new patterns in the brain, are called up in the formation of a functional
system.

The studies of organismic coherence by Mae-Wan Ho and Fritz Popp appear to
support the idea that even the alignment of molecules in cells is responsive
to the state of the entire organism.

The reason this seems implausible to most biologists is that cells are
commonly still seen as analogous to little test-tubes in which chemical
processes occur as the result of random collisions between molecules floating
in water. But Sidney Bernhard's study of glycolysis showed that the reactive
sugar molecules are passed individually from one enzyme to the next, in an
orderly manner.

In this system, the flow of energy, a series of oxidations and reductions
changing glucose into other substances, effectively pulls the molecules
through the system, contributing to order on a molecular level. Function
creates structure, which supports function.

Self-regulating systems are self-ordering systems. When a person is allowed to
function freely as a goal-directed, questioning system, the formation of
patterns in the brain will be spontaneous and appropriate, and orderly.
Knowing is the ability to hold patterns in awareness. Knowledge, rather than
being stored like money in the bank, is something that is regenerated, or
generated, as we need it.

When our own steering system is commandeered by the authorities, our patterns
of knowledge will be compartmented, and arranged in a fixed pattern. This kind
of knowledge either deteriorates, or it seeks more of its own kind.

While self-regulation and the generation of knowledge are pleasurable, having
knowledge imposed isn't.

Korzybski was right in warning about the dangers of letting names become
elements. This perception led Paolo Freire to emphasize the educational
importance of critically giving things their appropriate names, rather than
just banking the names given by an authority. To exist, humanly, is to name
the world, to change it. **Once named, the world in its turn reappears to the
namers as a problem and requires of them a new naming.** Human beings are not
built in silence, but in word, in work, in action-reflection. . . . to speak
a true word is to transform the world. 'Problem-posing' education,
responding to the essence of consciousness--intentionality--rejects
communiques and embodies communication (Freire, 1993).

Having the power to assign names is a source of power and wealth. The
pharmaceutical industry has been accused of inventing new diseases to sell new
drugs for treating them. Old definitions of cancer are hard to change, when
the medical profession has invested so much in treatments--radiation and
cytotoxic chemotherapy--which conflict with newer biological understanding of
cancer.

The person who is learning is critically interacting with both nature and
culture, with practical issues and theories.

Applying this to practical problems of health and nutrition, a first step is
to begin to think about which things are theories or deductions from theories,
which are habits, and which things are felt needs or appetites, and to get in
the habit of watching processes or things--such as signs and
symptoms--develop through time.

With practice, people can begin to see themselves as functional systems in
their main activities, such as eating, and to watch how their needs influence
their actions, and what effects different ways of eating have on their other
functions, such as sleeping and working. Do appetites govern the timing of
meals and the choice of foods? How does the time of day or time of month
affect appetites? People often watch for effects of foods, but usually only
for a few minutes or hours after eating. Some foods can produce symptoms days
after they were eaten, and the activation of the digestive system by a recent
meal can cause a reaction to something eaten previously.

Our traditional cultures, and advertising and schools give us definitions and
expectations relating to foods and symptoms and physiology, and they teach us
to think of our bodies in terms of an immune system, endocrine system,
digestive system, nervous system, and circulatory system, which are
mainly anatomical concepts that are more useful to the drug companies than to
the consumer of culture. Both conventional and alternative approaches to
medicine and health are likely to let those arbitrary ideas of systems cause
them to overlook real, but unnamed, processes.

When the organism is seen as a mosaic of parts, rather than as a system of
developing fields, medical treatments for one part, such as the circulatory
system, are likely to cause problems in other systems, because the parts
being treated don't exist as such in the real organism, with the result that
the treatments are seldom biologically reasonable.

Besides learning to perceive one's own physiology and becoming aware of the
processes of perceiving and knowing so that they can be improved, it's
important to seek information to expand the interpretive framework, and to
look for new contexts and implications.

Reading with a critical imagination is as important for science as it is for
literature or advertising. Good literature often opens expansive new ways of
seeing the world, and good science writing can do that too, but too often
scientific publications have ulterior motives, and should be read the way
advertising propaganda is read.

Some publications now require authors to state their conflicts of interest
(such as receiving money from a drug company while testing a drug), but
editors and publishers, who choose which studies will be published, seldom
reveal their conflicts of interest. As Marcia Angell showed, editorial choices
can turn statistical randomness into statistical significance. Private
ownership of science journals permits control of their content.

Besides being aware of the conflicts of interest and the frequent
insignificance of statistical significance, it's possible to recognize some
features of the style of argument which is often used in science propaganda. A
deductive style, rather than a descriptive and inductive style is extremely
common in technical writing, and it should always lead the reader to question
the principle from which deductions are made.

Membranes are made from Essential Fatty Acids, therefore those fatty acids
are nutritionally essential. But cells can multiply in a culture medium that
provides no fats. In biology, the most popular principles are simply
dogmatic beliefs about genes and membranes.

In physics, where testable inferences can be drawn from arbitrary assumptions
or doctrines, predictions that may be made based on different assumptions are
often ignored for ideological reasons. This ideological quality of physics can
permeate the other sciences when they use reductionist explanations.

Korzybski felt he was helping humanity to escape word magic and to advance
to a mathematical view of the world. But the same processes that caused people
to confuse words with things can cause people to confuse mathematical
descriptions with reality.

Chaos theory, which was a faddish excitement about the ability to generate
unpredictable output from a simple rule (which could be endlessly repeated by
a computer), has been suggested to explain many things in biology, including
heart rate variability. It doesn't. Instead, it has probably had a slightly
harmful effect, by distracting attention from real biological pattern- forming
processes.

Real substance can sometimes be modeled by descriptions of randomness, but
substances at all levels have intrinsic pattern-forming tendencies, and
context-dependent histories. Water, for example, has structure and structural
memory that can affect even simple chemical reactions, and even gases have
internal complexities that are often ignored. Real observations shouldn't be
displaced by theories. The ideal and identical atoms of the reductionists are
a crude fantasy, invented, more or less consciously, to serve their
ideological purposes. One purpose has been to justify their abstract models of
reality. A particularly noxious way of modeling reality has been based on the
assumption of randomness, justifying a statistical view of all things.

The neo-Kantian philosophy that has dominated US universities for more than a
century argues that our senses (even when extended instrumentally) are
limited, so our knowledge must be limited--we can only speak of theories or
interpretations, not of being. The world we see is, according to them, only an
artifact of our senses. A popular example is that the flower a bee sees is
different from the flower a human sees, because the bee's eye is sensitive to
ultraviolet light. (The triviality of the example is shown by the fact that
when a person's lens is removed because of a cataract, ultraviolet light
becomes visible, because it is no longer blocked by the tissue that is many
times thicker than a bee's lens.) There is a straw-man quality to their
arguments against philosophical realism and empirical science **:** No one
claims that our senses deliver complete knowledge all at once. What the
realists claim is that interacting with the world is an endless source of
valid knowledge.

When reading science articles, or listening to lectures, and even while
privately thinking about experiences, it can be useful to watch for the
improper use of assumptions. Our understanding has been shaped by the
assumptions of our culture, and these assumptions present an attitude toward
the nature of the world, in some cases even about the ontology that our
philosophers have said is beyond our reach. Evolution is shaped by random
mutations, nuclear decay is random, the universe is expanding, entropy
only increases, DNA controls inheritance, membrane pumps keep cells
alive, and all of the negative assumptions that have for so long denied the
systematic generation of order.

Every communicative interaction is an opportunity for the discovery of new
meanings and potentials.  

===========

**_Aristotelian motto: If the knower and the known form a functional system
they are substantially the same._**

===========

**REFERENCES**

P.K. Anokhin: 1975, **The essays on physiology of functional systems.**

1978, **Philosophical aspects of the theory of functional systems.**

1998, **Cybernetics of functional systems: Selected works,** Moscow, Medicine,
400 p., (in Russian).  

**Pedagogy of the Oppressed,** by Paulo Freire. New York: Continuum Books,
1993.  

**Synectics,** W.J.J. Gordon, Harper & Row, 1961.  

**Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields : Metaphors of Organicism in Twentieth-Century
Developmental Biology,** Donna Jeanne Haraway, 1976.  

**We Make the Road by Walking** : **Conversations on Education and Social
Change,** Myles Horton, Paolo Freire, 1990.  

**Science and Sanity,** Alfred Korzybski, 1933.

Alfred Korzybski, "The Role of Language in the Perceptual Processes," in
**Perception: An Approach to Personality,** edited by Robert R. Blake and
Glenn V. Ramsey. 1951, The Ronald Press Company, New York.  

Marshall McLuhan: _...the devil is in the media,_ quoted by Derrick
DeKerkhove, Director of the McLuhan Program in Culture and Technology at the
University of Toronto.  

**Biochemistry and Morphogenesis** , by Joseph Needham. Cambridge University
Press, 1942.  

**Cybernetics--or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine,**
Norbert Wiener 1948  

**The Human Use of Human Beings,** The Riverside Press (Houghton Mifflin Co.),
1950.

_...the rules of the war game never catch up with the facts of the real
situation. The future offers very little hope for those who expect that our
new mechanical slaves will offer us a world in which we may rest from
thinking. Help us they may, but at the cost of supreme demands upon our
honesty and our intelligence._ ** __ ** Norbert Weiner, **God and Golem,
Inc.,** 1964 **.**  

_Digital thinking sees the organism as a mosaic of parts, making rigid and
specific naming essential; analog thinking sees the organism as fields in
development, making flexibility in naming essential._

_PS: When defense lawyers collaborate (collude) with prosecutors, it's
considered a crime. What if physicians, instead of covering up for each other,
used the adversary system that is supposed to produce the best knowledge in
law and science, to evaluate their patient's diagnoses and treatments?_  

J Intern Med. 1999 Jan;245(1):57-61. **Decreased heart rate variability in
patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus is related to arterial wall
stiffness.** Jensen-Urstad K, Reichard P, Jensen-Urstad M.

Eur J Appl Physiol. 2010 Apr 23. **Heart period sensitivity to forced
oscillations in ventilatory pressure.** Quint SR, Vaughn BV.  

Copyright 2007. Raymond Peat, P.O. Box 5764, Eugene OR 97405. All Rights
Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
Not for republication without written permission.  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

