![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
TSH, temperature, pulse rate, and other indicators in hypothyroidism**  
  

**Each of the indicators of thyroid function can be useful, but has to be
interpreted in relation to the physiological state.**

**Increasingly, TSH (the pituitary thyroid stimulating hormone) has been
treated as if it meant something independently; however, it can be brought
down into the normal range, or lower, by substances other than the thyroid
hormones.**

**Basal body temperature is influenced by many things besides thyroid. The
resting heart rate helps to interpret the temperature. In a cool environment,
the temperature of the extremities is sometimes a better indicator than the
oral or eardrum temperature.**

**The basal metabolic rate, especially if the rate of carbon dioxide
production is measured, is very useful. The amount of water and calories
disposed of in a day can give a rough idea of the metabolic rate.**

**The T wave on the electrocardiogram, and the relaxation rate on the Achilles
reflex test are useful.**

**Blood tests for cholesterol, albumin, glucose, sodium, lactate, total
thyroxine and total T3 are useful to know, because they help to evaluate the
present thyroid status, and sometimes they can suggest ways to correct the
problem.**

**Less common blood or urine tests (adrenaline, cortisol, ammonium, free fatty
acids), if they are available, can help to understand compensatory reactions
to hypothyroidism.**

**A book such as McGavack's _The Thyroid,_ that provides traditional medical
knowledge about thyroid physiology, can help to dispel some of the current
dogmas about the thyroid.**

**Using more physiologically relevant methods to diagnose hypothyroidism will
contribute to understanding its role in many problems now considered to be
unrelated to the thyroid.**

======================================  

I have spoken to several people who told me that their doctors had diagnosed
them as both hypothyroid and hyperthyroid. Although physicists can believe
in things which are simultaneously both particles and not particles, I think
biology (and medicine, as far as it is biologically based) should occupy a
world in which things are not simultaneously themselves and their opposites.
Those illogical, impossible diagnoses make it clear that the rules for
interpreting test results have in some situations lost touch with reality.

Until the 1940s, hypothyroidism was diagnosed on the basis of signs and
symptoms, and sometimes the measurement of oxygen consumption (basal
metabolic rate) was used for confirmation. Besides the introduction of
supposedly scientific blood tests, such as the measurement of protein-bound
iodine (PBI) in the blood, there were other motives for becoming parsimonious
with the diagnosis of hypothyroidism. With the introduction of synthetic
thyroxine, one of the arguments for increasing its sale was that natural
Armour thyroid (which was precisely standardized by biological tests) wasn't
properly standardized, and that an overdose could be fatal. A few articles in
prestigious journals created a myth of the danger of thyroid, and the
synthetic thyroxine was (falsely) said to be precisely standardized, and to be
without the dangers of the complete glandular extract.

Between 1940 and about 1950, the estimated percentage of hypothyroid Americans
went from 30% or 40% to 5%, on the basis of the PBI test, and it has stayed
close to that lower number (many publications claim it to be only 1% or 2%).
By the time that the measurement of PBI was shown to be only vaguely related
to thyroid hormonal function, it had been in use long enough for a new
generation of physicians to be taught to disregard the older ideas about
diagnosing and treating hypothyroidism. They were taught to inform their
patients that the traditional symptoms that were identified as hypothyroidism
before 1950 were the result of the patients' own behavior (sloth and gluttony,
for example, which produced fatigue, obesity, and heart disease), or that the
problems were imaginary (women's hormonal and neurological problems,
especially), or that they were simply mysterious diseases and defects
(recurring infections, arthritis, and cancer, for example).

As the newer, more direct tests became available, their meaning was defined in
terms of the statistical expectation of hypothyroidism that had become an
integral part of medical culture. To make the new TSH measurements fit the
medical doctrine, an 8- or 10-fold variation in the hormone was defined as
normal. With any other biological measurement, such as erythrocyte count,
blood pressure, body weight, or serum sodium, calcium, chloride, or glucose, a
variation of ten or 20 percent from the mean is considered to be meaningful.
If the doctrine regarding the 5% prevalence of hypothyroidism hadn't been so
firmly established, there would have been more interest in establishing the
meaning of these great variations in TSH.

In recent years the normal range for TSH has been decreasing. In 2003, the
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists changed their guidelines for
the normal range to 0.3 to 3.0 microIU/ml. But even though this lower range is
less arbitrary than the older standards, it still isn't based on an
understanding of the physiological meaning of TSH.

Over a period of several years, I never saw a person whose TSH was over 2
microIU/ml who was comfortably healthy, and I formed the impression that the
normal, or healthy, quantity was probably something less than 1.0.

If a pathologically high TSH is defined as normal, its role in major diseases,
such as breast cancer, mastalgia, MS, fibrotic diseases, and epilepsy, will
simply be ignored. Even if the possibility is considered, the use of an
irrational norm, instead of a proper comparison, such as the statistical
difference between the mean TSH levels of cases and controls, leads to denial
of an association between hypothyroidism and important diseases, despite
evidence that indicates an association.

Some critics have said that most physicians are treating the TSH, rather
than the patient. If TSH is itself pathogenic, because of its pro-inflammatory
actions, then that approach isn't entirely useless, even when they treat the
TSH with only thyroxine, which often isn't well converted into the active
triiodothyronine, T3. But the relief of a few symptoms in a small percentage
of the population is serving to blind the medical world to the real
possibilities of thyroid therapy.

TSH has direct actions on many cell types other than the thyroid, and probably
contributes directly to edema (Wheatley and Edwards, 1983), fibrosis, and
mastocytosis. If people are concerned about the effects of a TSH deficiency,
then I think they have to explain the remarkable longevity of the animals
lacking pituitaries in W.D. Denckla's experiments, or of the naturally
pituitary deficient dwarf mice that lack TSH, prolactin, and growth hormone,
but live about a year longer than normal mice (Heiman, et al., 2003). Until
there is evidence that very low TSH is somehow harmful, there is no basis for
setting a lower limit to the normal range.

Some types of thyroid cancer can usually be controlled by keeping TSH
completely suppressed. Since TSH produces reactions in cells as different as
fibroblasts and fat cells, pigment cells in the skin, mast cells and bone
marrow cells (Whetsell, et al., 1999), it won't be surprising if it turns out
to have a role in the development of a variety of cancers, including melanoma.

Many things, including the liver and the senses, regulate the function of the
thyroid system, and the pituitary is just one of the factors affecting the
synthesis and secretion of the thyroid hormones.

A few people who had extremely low levels of pituitary hormones, and were told
that they must take several hormone supplements for the rest of their life,
began producing normal amounts of those hormones within a few days of eating
more protein and fruit. Their endocrinologist described them as, effectively,
having no pituitary gland. Extreme malnutrition in Africa has been described
as creating . . . a condition resembling hypophysectomy, (Ingenbleek and
Beckers, 1975) but the people I talked to in Oregon were just following what
they thought were healthful nutritional policies, avoiding eggs and sugars,
and eating soy products.

Occasionally, a small supplement of thyroid in addition to a good diet is
needed to quickly escape from the stress-induced hypophysectomized
condition.

Aging, infection, trauma, prolonged cortisol excess, somatostatin, dopamine or
L-dopa, adrenaline (sometimes; Mannisto, et al., 1979), amphetamine, caffeine
and fever can lower TSH, apart from the effect of feedback by the thyroid
hormones, creating a situation in which TSH can appear normal or low, at the
same time that there is a real hypothyroidism.

A disease or its treatment can obscure the presence of hypothyroidism.
Parkinson's disease is a clear example of this. (Garcia-Moreno and Chacon,
2002: ... in the same way hypothyroidism can simulate Parkinson's disease,
the latter can also conceal hypothyroidism.)

The stress-induced suppression of TSH and other pituitary hormones is
reminiscent of the protective inhibition that occurs in individual nerve
fibers during dangerously intense stress, and might involve such a
parabiotic process in the nerves of the hypothalamus or other brain region.
The relative disappearance of the pituitary hormones when the organism is in
very good condition (for example, the suppression of ACTH and cortisol by
sugar or pregnenolone) is parallel to the high energy quiescence of individual
nerve fibers.

These associations between energy state and cellular activity can be used for
evaluating the thyroid state, as in measuring nerve and muscle reaction times
and relaxation rates. For example, relaxation which is retarded, because of
slow restoration of the energy needed for cellular repolarization, is the
basis for the traditional use of the Achilles tendon reflex relaxation test
for diagnosing hypothyroidism. The speed of relaxation of the heart muscle
also indicates thyroid status (Mohr-Kahaly, et al., 1996).

Stress, besides suppressing the TSH, acts in other ways to suppress the real
thyroid function. Cortisol, for example, inhibits the conversion of T4 to T3,
which is responsible for the respiratory production of energy and carbon
dioxide. Adrenaline, besides leading to increased production of cortisol, is
lipolytic, releasing the fatty acids which, if they are polyunsaturated,
inhibit the production and transport of thyroid hormone, and also interfere
directly with the respiratory functions of the mitochondria. Adrenaline
decreases the conversion to T4 to T3, and increases the formation of the
antagonistic reverse T3 (Nauman, et al., 1980, 1984).

During the night, at the time adrenaline and free fatty acids are at their
highest, TSH usually reaches its peak **.** TSH itself can produce lipolysis,
raising the level of circulating free fatty acids. This suggests that a high
level of TSH could sometimes contribute to functional hypothyroidism, because
of the antimetabolic effects of the unsaturated fatty acids.

These are the basic reasons for thinking that the TSH tests should be given
only moderate weight in interpreting thyroid function.

The metabolic rate is very closely related to thyroid hormone function, but
defining it and measuring it have to be done with awareness of its complexity.

The basal metabolic rate that was commonly used in the 1930s for diagnosing
thyroid disorders was usually a measurement of the rate of oxygen consumption,
made while lying quietly early in the morning without having eaten anything
for several hours. When carbon dioxide production can be measured at the same
time as oxygen consumption, it's possible to estimate the proportion of energy
that is being derived from glucose, rather than fat or protein, since
oxidation of glucose produces more carbon dioxide than oxidation of fat does.
Glucose oxidation is efficient, and suggests a state of low stress.

The very high adrenaline that sometimes occurs in hypothyroidism will increase
the metabolic rate in several ways, but it tends to increase the oxidation of
fat. If the production of carbon dioxide is measured, the adrenaline/stress
component of metabolism will be minimized in the measurement. When
polyunsaturated fats are mobilized, their spontaneous peroxidation consumes
some oxygen, without producing any usable energy or carbon dioxide, so this is
another reason that the production of carbon dioxide is a very good indicator
of thyroid hormone activity. The measurement of oxygen consumption was usually
done for two minutes, and carbon dioxide production could be accurately
measured in a similarly short time. Even a measurement of the percentage of
carbon dioxide at the end of a single breath can give an indication of the
stress-free, thyroid hormone stimulated rate of metabolism (it should approach
five or six percent of the expired air).

Increasingly in the last several years, people who have many of the standard
symptoms of hypothyroidism have told me that they are hyperthyroid, and that
they have to decide whether to have surgery or radiation to destroy their
thyroid gland. They have told me that their symptoms of hyperthyroidism,
according to their physicians, were fatigue, weakness, irritability, poor
memory, and insomnia.

They didn't eat very much. They didn't sweat noticeably, and they drank a
moderate amount of fluids. Their pulse rates and body temperature were normal,
or a little low.

Simply on the basis of some laboratory tests, they were going to have their
thyroid gland destroyed. But on the basis of all of the traditional ways of
judging thyroid function, they were hypothyroid.

Broda Barnes, who worked mostly in Fort Collins, Colorado, argued that the
body temperature, measured before getting out of bed in the morning, was the
best basis for diagnosing thyroid function.

Fort Collins, at a high altitude, has a cool climate most of the year. The
altitude itself helps the thyroid to function normally. For example, one study
(Savourey, et al., 1998) showed an 18% increase in T3 at a high altitude, and
mitochondria become more numerous and are more efficient at preventing lactic
acid production, capillary leakiness, etc.

In Eugene during a hot and humid summer, I saw several obviously hypothyroid
people whose temperature seemed perfectly normal, euthyroid by Barnes'
standards. But I noticed that their pulse rates were, in several cases, very
low. It takes very little metabolic energy to keep the body at 98.6 degrees
when the air temperature is in the nineties. In cooler weather, I began asking
people whether they used electric blankets, and ignored their temperature
measurements if they did.

The combination of pulse rate and temperature is much better than either one
alone. I happened to see two people whose resting pulse rates were chronically
extremely high, despite their hypothyroid symptoms. When they took a thyroid
supplement, their pulse rates came down to normal. (Healthy and intelligent
groups of people have been found to have an average resting pulse rate of
85/minute, while less healthy groups average close to 70/minute.)

The speed of the pulse is partly determined by adrenaline, and many
hypothyroid people compensate with very high adrenaline production. Knowing
that hypothyroid people are susceptible to hypoglycemia, and that hypoglycemia
increases adrenaline, I found that many people had normal (and sometimes
faster than average) pulse rates when they woke up in the morning, and when
they got hungry. Salt, which helps to maintain blood sugar, also tends to
lower adrenalin, and hypothyroid people often lose salt too easily in their
urine and sweat. Measuring the pulse rate before and after breakfast, and in
the afternoon, can give a good impression of the variations in adrenalin. (The
blood pressure, too, will show the effects of adrenaline in hypothyroid
people. Hypothyroidism is a major cause of hypertension.)

But hypoglycemia also tends to decrease the conversion of T4 to T3, so heat
production often decreases when a person is hungry. First, their fingers,
toes, and nose will get cold, because adrenalin, or adrenergic sympathetic
nervous activity, will increase to keep the brain and heart at a normal
temperature, by reducing circulation to the skin and extremities. Despite the
temperature-regulating effect of adrenalin, the reduced heat production
resulting from decreased T3 will make a person susceptible to hypothermia if
the environment is cool.

Since food, especially carbohydrate and protein, will increase blood sugar and
T3 production, eating is thermogenic, and the oral (or eardrum) temperature
is likely to rise after eating.

Blood sugar falls at night, and the body relies on the glucose stored in the
liver as glycogen for energy, and hypothyroid people store very little sugar.
As a result, adrenalin and cortisol begin to rise almost as soon as a person
goes to bed, and in hypothyroid people, they rise very high, with the
adrenalin usually peaking around 1 or 2 A.M., and the cortisol peaking around
dawn; the high cortisol raises blood sugar as morning approaches, and allows
adrenalin to decline. Some people wake up during the adrenalin peak with a
pounding heart, and have trouble getting back to sleep unless they eat
something.

If the night-time stress is very high, the adrenalin will still be high until
breakfast, increasing both temperature and pulse rate. The cortisol stimulates
the breakdown of muscle tissue and its conversion to energy, so it is
thermogenic, for some of the same reasons that food is thermogenic.

After eating breakfast, the cortisol (and adrenalin, if it stayed high despite
the increased cortisol) will start returning to a more normal, lower level, as
the blood sugar is sustained by food, instead of by the stress hormones. In
some hypothyroid people, this is a good time to measure the temperature and
pulse rate. In a normal person, both temperature and pulse rate rise after
breakfast, but in very hypothyroid people either, or both, might fall.

Some hypothyroid people have a very slow pulse, apparently because they aren't
compensating with a large production of adrenalin. When they eat, the liver's
increased production of T3 is likely to increase both their temperature and
their pulse rate.

By watching the temperature and pulse rate at different times of day,
especially before and after meals, it's possible to separate some of the
effects of stress from the thyroid-dependent, relatively basal metabolic
rate. When beginning to take a thyroid supplement, it's important to keep a
chart of these measurements for at least two weeks, since that's roughly the
half-life of thyroxine in the body. When the body has accumulated a steady
level of the hormones, and begun to function more fully, the factors such as
adrenaline that have been chronically distorted to compensate for
hypothyroidism will have begun to normalize, and the early effects of the
supplementary thyroid will in many cases seem to disappear, with heart rate
and temperature declining. The daily dose of thyroid often has to be increased
several times, as the state of stress and the adrenaline and cortisol
production decrease.

Counting calories achieves approximately the same thing as measuring oxygen
consumption, and is something that will allow people to evaluate the various
thyroid tests they may be given by their doctor. Although food intake and
metabolic rate vary from day to day, an approximate calorie count for several
days can often make it clear that a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is mistaken.
If a person is eating only about 1800 calories per day, and has a steady and
normal body weight, any hyperthyroidism is strictly metaphysical, or as they
say, clinical.

When the humidity and temperature are normal, a person evaporates about a
liter of water for every 1000 calories metabolized. Eating 2000 calories per
day, a normal person will take in about four liters of liquid, and form about
two liters of urine. A hyperthyroid person will invisibly lose several quarts
of water in a day, and a hypothyroid person may evaporate a quart or less.

When cells, because of a low metabolic rate, don't easily return to their
thoroughly energized state after they have been stimulated, they tend to take
up water, or, in the case of blood vessels, to become excessively permeable.
Fatigued muscles swell noticeably, and chronically fatigued nerves can swell
enough to cause them to be compressed by the surrounding connective tissues.
The energy and hydration state of cells can be detected in various ways,
including magnetic resonance, and electrical impedance, but functional tests
are easy and practical.

With suitable measuring instruments, the effects of hypothyroidism can be seen
as slowed conduction along nerves, and slowed recovery and readiness for new
responses. Slow reaction time is associated with slowed memory, perception,
and other mental processes. Some of these nervous deficits can be remedied
slightly just by raising the core temperature and providing suitable
nutrients, but the active thyroid hormone, T3 is mainly responsible for
maintaining the temperature, the nutrients, and the intracellular respiratory
energy production.

In nerves, as in other cells, the ability to rest and repair themselves
increases with the proper level of thyroid hormone. In some cells, the
energized stability produced by the thyroid hormones prevents inflammation or
an immunological hyperactivity. In the 1950s, shortly after it was identified
as a distinct substance, T3 was found to be anti-inflammatory, and both T4 and
T3 have a variety of anti-inflammatory actions, besides the suppression of the
pro-inflammatory TSH.

Because the actions of T3 can be inhibited by many factors, including
polyunsaturated fatty acids, reverse T3, and excess thyroxine, the absolute
level of T3 can't be used by itself for diagnosis. Free T3 or free T4 is a
laboratory concept, and the biological activity of T3 doesn't necessarily
correspond to its freedom in the test. T3 bound to its transport proteins
can be demonstrated to enter cells, mitochondria, and nuclei. Transthyretin,
which carries both vitamin A and thyroid hormones, is sharply decreased by
stress, and should probably be regularly measured as part of the thyroid
examination.

When T3 is metabolically active, lactic acid won't be produced unnecessarily,
so the measurement of lactate in the blood is a useful test for interpreting
thyroid function. Cholesterol is used rapidly under the influence of T3, and
ever since the 1930s it has been clear that serum cholesterol rises in
hypothyroidism, and is very useful diagnostically. Sodium, magnesium, calcium,
potassium, creatinine, albumin, glucose, and other components of the serum are
regulated by the thyroid hormones, and can be used along with the various
functional tests for evaluating thyroid function.

Stereotypes are important. When a very thin person with high blood pressure
visits a doctor, hypothyroidism isn't likely to be considered; even high TSH
and very low T4 and T3 are likely to be ignored, because of the stereotypes.
(And if those tests were in the healthy range, the person would be at risk for
the hyperthyroid diagnosis.) But remembering some of the common adaptive
reactions to a thyroid deficiency, the catabolic effects of high cortisol and
the circulatory disturbance caused by high adrenaline should lead to doing
some of the appropriate tests, instead of treating the person's hypertension
and under nourished condition.  

**REFERENCES**

Clin Chem Lab Med. 2002 Dec;40(12):1344-8. **Transthyretin: its response to
malnutrition and stress injury. Clinical usefulness and economic
implications.** Bernstein LH, Ingenbleek Y.

Endokrinologie. 1968;53(3):217-21. **[Influence of hypophysectomy and
pituitary hormones on dextran edema in rats]** German. Boeskor A, Gabbiani G.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Nov;86(11):5148-51. **Sudden enlargement of
local recurrent thyroid tumor after recombinant human TSH administration.**
Braga M, Ringel MD, Cooper DS.

J Investig Med. 2002 Sep;50(5):350-4; discussion 354-5. **The nocturnal serum
thyrotropin surge is inhibited in patients with adrenal Incidentaloma.** Coiro
V, Volpi R, Capretti L, Manfredi G, Magotti MG, Bianconcini M, Cataldo S,
Chiodera P.

Rev Neurol (Paris). 1992;148(5):371-3. **[Hashimoto's encephalopathy: toxic or
autoimmune mechanism?]** [Article in French] Ghawche F, Bordet R, Destee A.
Service de Clinique Neurologique A, CHU, Lille. A 36-year-old woman presented
with partial complex status epilepticus. Magnetic resonance imaging with
T2-weighted sequences showed a high-intensity signal in the left posterior
frontal area. Hashimoto's thyroiditis was then discovered. The disappearance
of the high-intensity signal after corticosteroid therapy was suggestive of an
autoimmune mechanism. However, improvement could be obtained only with a
hormonal treatment, which supports the hypothesis of a pathogenetic role of
the Tyrosine-Releasing Hormone (TRH).

Am J Clin Nutr. 1986 Mar;43(3):406-13. **Thyroid hormone and carrier protein
interrelationships in children recovering rom kwashiorkor.** Kalk WJ, Hofman
KJ, Smit AM, van Drimmelen M, van der Walt LA, Moore RE. We have studied 15
infants with severe protein energy malnutrition (PEM) as a model of
nutritional nonthyroidal illness. Changes in circulating thyroid hormones,
binding proteins, and their interrelationships were assessed before and during
recovery. Serum concentrations of total thyroxine and triiodothyronine and of
thyroxine-binding proteins were extremely reduced, and increased progressively
during 3 wk of refeeding. The T4:TBG molar ratio was initially 0.180 +/-
0.020, and increased progressively, parallel to the increases in TT4, to 0.344
+/- 0.038 after 21 days (p less than 0.025). The changes in free T4 estimates
varied according to the methods used--FTI and analogue FT4 increased, dialysis
FT4 fraction decreased. Serum TSH levels increased transiently during
recovery. It is concluded 1) there is reduced binding of T4 and T3 to TBG in
untreated PEM which takes 2-3 wk to recover; 2) there are methodological
differences in evaluating free T4 levels in PEM; 3) **increased TSH secretion
appears to be an integral part of the recovery from PEM.**

Neuroendocrinology. 1982;35(2):139-47. **Neurotransmitter control of
thyrotropin secretion.** Krulich L. The central dopaminergic system seems to
have an inhibitory influence on the secretion of thyrotropin (TSH) both in
humans and rats.

Endocrinology 1972 Mar;90(3):795-801. **TSH-induced release of
5-hydroxytryptamine and histamine rat thyroid mast cells.** Ericson LE,
Hakanson R, Melander A, Owman C, Sundler F.

Rev Neurol. 2002 Oct 16-31;35(8):741-2. **[Hypothyroidism concealed by
Parkinson's disease][** in Spanish] Garcia-Moreno JM, Chacon J. Servicio de
Neurologia, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Espana.
[Sinue@arrakis.es](mailto:Sinue@arrakis.es) AIMS: Although it is commonly
recognised that diseases of the thyroids can simulate extrapyramidal
disorders, a review of the causes of Parkinsonism in the neurology literature
shows that they are not usually mentioned or, if so, only very briefly. The
development of hypothyroidism in a patient with Parkinson s disease can go
undetected, since the course of both diseases can involve similar clinical
features. Generally speaking there is always an insistence on the need to
conduct a thyroidal hormone study in any patient with symptoms of Parkinson,
but no emphasis is put on the need to continue to rule out dysthyroidism
throughout the natural course of the disease, in spite of the fact that the
concurrence of both pathological conditions can be high and that, in the same
way hypothyroidism can simulate Parkinson s disease, the latter can also
conceal hypothyroidism. CASE REPORT: We report the case of a female patient
who had been suffering from Parkinson s disease for 17 years and started to
present on off fluctuations that did not respond to therapy. Hypothyroidism
was observed and the hormone replacement therapy used to resolve the problem
allowed the Parkinsonian fluctuations to be controlled. CONCLUSIONS: We
believe that it is very wise to suspect hypothyroidism in patients known to be
suffering from Parkinson s disease, and especially so in cases where the
clinical condition worsens and symptoms no longer respond properly to
antiparkinsonian treatment. These observations stress the possible role played
by thyroid hormones in dopaminergic metabolism and vice versa.

Endocrine. 2003 Feb-Mar;20(1-2):149-54. **Body composition of prolactin-,
growth hormone, and thyrotropin-deficient Ames dwarf mice.** Heiman ML,
Tinsley FC, Mattison JA, Hauck S, Bartke A. Lilly Research Labs, Corporate
Center, Indianapolis, IN, USA. **Ames dwarf mice have primary deficiency of
prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH),
and live considerably longer than normal** **animals from the same line.**

(Lancet. 1975 Nov 1;2(7940):845-8 **.. Triiodothyronine and thyroid-
stimulating hormone in protein-calorie malnutrition in infants.** Ingenbleek
Y, Beckers C.)

Am J Med Sci. 1995 Nov;310(5):202-5. **Case report: thyrotropin-releasing
hormone-induced myoclonus and tremor in a patient with Hashimoto's
encephalopathy.** Ishii K, Hayashi A, Tamaoka A, Usuki S, Mizusawa H, Shoji S.

Rev Neurol (Paris). 1985;141(1):55-8. [ **Hashimoto's thyroiditis and
myoclonic encephalopathy. Pathogenic hypothesis]** [Article in French]
Latinville D, Bernardi O, Cougoule JP, Bioulac B, Henry P, Loiseau P, Mauriac
L. A 49 year old caucasian female with Hashimoto thyroiditis, developed during
two years a neurological disorder with tonic-clonic and myoclonic seizures and
confusional states. Some attacks were followed by a transient postictal
aphasia. **Some parallelism was noted between the clinical state and TSH
levels.** Neurological events disappeared with the normalisation of thyroid
functions. This association of Hashimoto thyroiditis and myoclonic
encephalopathy has been rarely published. Pathogenesis could be double. Focal
signs could be due to an auto-immune mechanism, perhaps through a vasculitis.
A non-endocrine central action could explain diffuse signs: tonic-clonic
seizures, myoclonus and confusional episodes.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1992 Jun;74(6):1361-5. **Fatty acid-induced increase
in serum dialyzable free thyroxine after physical exercise: implication for
nonthyroidal illness.** Liewendahl K, Helenius T, Naveri H, Tikkanen H.

Adv Exp Med Biol. 1990;274:315-29. **Role of monokines in control of anterior
pituitary hormone release.** McCann SM, Rettori V, Milenkovic L, Jurcovicova
J, Gonzalez MC.

Acta Endocrinol (Copenh). 1979 Feb;90(2):249-58. **Dual action of adrenergic
system on the regulation of thyrotrophin secretion in the male rat.**
Mannisto, Ranta T, Tuomisto J. **_"_** _....noradrenaline (NA) (1 h), and
L-Dopa (1 h) were also effective in decreasing serum TSH levels...."_

Endocrinology 1971 Aug;89(2):528-33. **TSH-induced appearance and stimulation
of amine-containing mast cells in the mouse thyroid.** Melander A, Owman C,
Sundler F.

Epilepsy Res. 1988 Mar-Apr;2(2):102-10. **Evidence of hypothyroidism in the
genetically epilepsy-prone rat.** Mills SA, Savage DD. Department of
Pharmacology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque 87131\.
A number of neurochemical and behavioral similarities exist between the
genetically epilepsy-prone (GEPR) rat and rats made hypothyroid at birth.
These similarities include lower brain monoamine levels, audiogenic seizure
susceptibility and lowered electroconvulsive shock seizure threshold. Given
these similarities, thyroid hormone status was examined in GEPR rats. Serum
samples were collected from GEPR-9 and non-epileptic control rats at 5, 9, 13,
16, 22, 31, 45, 60, 90, 150 and 350 days of age. Serum thyroxine (T4) levels
were significantly lower in GEPR-9 rats compared to control until day 22 of
age. **GEPR-9 thyrotropin (TSH) levels were significantly elevated during the
period of diminished serum T4. GEPR-9 triiodothyronine (T3) levels were lower
than control throughout the first year of life. The data indicate that the
GEPR-9 rat is hypothyroid from at least the second week of life up to 1 year
of age. The** critical impact of neonatal hypothyroidism on brain function
coupled with the development of the audiogenic seizure susceptible trait by
the GEPR-9 rat during **the third week after birth suggests that neonatal
hypothyroidism could be one etiological factor in the development of the
seizure-prone state of GEPR-9 rats.**

Przegl Lek. 1998;55(5):250-8. **[Mastopathy and simple goiter--mutual
relationships]** [Article in Polish] Mizia-Stec K, Zych F, Widala E. **Non-
toxic goitre was found in 80% patients with mastopathy, and the results of
palpation examination of thyroid were confirmed by thyroid ultrasonographic
examination. Non-toxic goitre was significantly more often in patients with
mastopathy in comparison with healthy women,** and there was found
significantly higher thyroid volume in these patients. Endocrinology. 1997
Apr;138(4):1434-9. **Thyroxine administration prevents streptococcal cell
wall-induced inflammatory responses.** Rittenhouse PA, Redei E.

Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1998;77(1-2):37-43. **Pre-adaptation,
adaptation and de-adaptation to high altitude in humans: hormonal and
biochemical changes at sea level.** Savourey G, Garcia N, Caravel JP, Gharib
C, Pouzeratte N, Martin S, Bittel J.

Endocrinol Jpn. 1992 Oct;39(5):445-53. **Plasma free fatty acids, inhibitor of
extrathyroidal conversion of T4 to T3 and thyroid hormone binding inhibitor in
patients with various nonthyroidal illnesses.** Suzuki Y, Nanno M, Gemma R,
Yoshimi T.

Natl Med J India. 1998 Mar-Apr;11(2):62-5. **Neuropsychological impairment and
altered thyroid hormone levels in epilepsy.** Thomas SV, Alexander A,
Padmanabhan V, Sankara Sarma P. Department of Neurology, Sree Chitra Tirunal
Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala,
India. BACKGROUND: Neuropsychological impairment is a common problem in
epilepsy which interferes with the quality of life of patients. Similarly,
thyroid hormone levels have been observed to be abnormal in patients with
epilepsy on various treatments. This study aimed to ascertain any possible
correlation between neuropsychological performance and thyroid hormone levels
among epilepsy patients. METHODS: Thyroid hormone levels, indices of
neuropsychological performance and social adaptation of 43 epilepsy patients
were compared with those of age- and sex-matched healthy control subjects.
RESULTS: Epilepsy patients exhibited significantly (p < 0.001) lower scores on
attention, memory, constructional praxis, finger tapping time, and verbal
intelligence quotient (i.q.) when compared with controls. **Their T3, T4 and
Free T3 levels were significantly lower;** and **TSH and Free T4 levels were
significantly higher than that of controls.** There was no statistically
significant correlation between the indices of neuropsychological performance
and thyroid hormone levels. CONCLUSION: We did not observe any correlation
between neuropsychological impairment and thyroid hormone levels among
patients with epilepsy.

Crit Care Med. 1994 Nov;22(11):1747-53. **Dopamine suppresses pituitary
function in infants and children.** Van den Berghe G, de Zegher F, Lauwers P.

Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2000 Jan 1;144(1):5-8. **[Epilepsy, disturbances of
behavior and consciousness in presence of normal thyroxine levels: still,
consider the thyroid gland]** [Article in Dutch] Vrancken AF, Braun KP, de
Valk HW, Rinkel GJ. Afd. Neurologie, Universitair Medisch Centrum Utrecht.
Three patients, one man aged 51 years, and two women aged 49 and 52 years, had
severe fluctuating and progressive neurological and psychiatric symptoms. All
three had normal thyroxine levels but elevated thyroid stimulating hormone
levels and positive thyroid antibodies. Based on clinical, laboratory, MRI and
EEG findings they were eventually diagnosed with **Hashimoto's encephalopathy,
associated with Hashimoto thyroiditis.** Treatment with prednisone in addition
to thyroxine suppletion resulted in a remarkable remission of their
neuropsychiatric symptoms. The disease is probably under-recognized.

Cell Immunol. 1999 Mar 15;192(2):159-66. **Neuroendocrine-induced synthesis of
bone marrow-derived cytokines with inflammatory immunomodulating properties.**
Whetsell M, Bagriacik EU, Seetharamaiah GS, Prabhakar BS, Klein JR.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2007. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

