![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Immunodeficiency, dioxins, stress, and the hormones**  
  
**CRITICAL POINTS** :

_*There are many toxins which modify hormonal responses, activating cells and
altering the immune system (including estrogens and dioxins.) When these act
early in life, extremely small amounts can cause life-long changes.

*When respiratory energy production is blocked in stimulated cells, the cells are likely to die. (Cortisol, estrogen, polyunsaturated oils have this effect, especially on thymus cells.) 

*Antibodies are involved in removing the debris of cells that have disintegrated. Intense cellular damage causes many "autoantibodies" to be produced. People with AIDS have a high incidence of "autoimmunity." 

*Endogenous retroviruses are activated by toxins known to be associated with immunodeficiency. Everyone has endogenous retroviruses. The antibodies which are used to diagnose "HIV" infection can, in the demonstrated absence of that virus, be produced in connection with lupus, Sjogren's syndrome, and arthritis. These autoimmune conditions are promoted by estrogen. 

*Estrogen activates the production of cortisol, and damages the normal feedback control, causing both cortisol and ACTH to be elevated. 

*Estrogen causes chronically elevated free fatty acids, and synergizes with unsaturated fats. 

*Estrogen inhibits thyroid function. 

Hypercortisolism is typically associated with hypothyroidism, and both tend to
cause the loss of lean body mass.

*AIDS is often compared to Addison's disease, because of hyponatremia (loss of sodium) and fatigue. Hypothyroidism causes hyponatremia and many other features seen in AIDS. 

*Increased levels of cortisol, estrogen, and polyunsaturated fatty acids, and decreased levels of the active thyroid hormone (T3) and (placental) progesterone have been found to occur in AIDS. 

*Progesterone can contribute to the inhibition of HIV replication and transmission. 

*Common environmental factors can produce hormonal changes leading to immunodeficiency. 

_

* * *

One hospital in southern Vietnam admitted 437 septicemia patients between
mid-1993 and 1994; 23% of the adults died.  
In 8 months, 17,000 seals died of infections in Europe. In California, many
seals die with an unusual form of metastatic cancer. Seals are highly
contaminated with industrial dioxins.  
In Africa, aflatoxin is strongly associated with immunodeficiency. In animals,
both dioxin and aflatoxin activate the expression of viruses.  
Endometriosis is stimulated by dioxins. Environmental estrogens affect the
immune system.  

* * *

  
It has been over ten years since I wrote about "AIDS" (e.g., "Repairing the
Immune System," in _Cofactors in AIDS and HIV infection,_ edited by R.R.
Watson, l989) and the official doctrine that it is caused by the "HIV" virus
still hasn't been supported by anything that resembles real science.
Duesberg's arguments have never been answered (except by bureaucratic
thuggery).  
In 1989 I pointed out that septicemia, blood stream infection, in young
adults, which used to be a rare thing, and which indicates defective immunity,
has been increasing in a remarkably continuous way since the late 1940s, and I
reviewed the many things in our environment that are known to suppress
immunity, and which **** have become increasingly prevalent in our ****
environment **\--unsaturated vegetable oils, ferrous iron and carrageenan in
our foods, lead in air, food, and water, exposure to medical, military, and
industrial ionizing radiation, vaccinations, pesticides, chlorinated
hydrocarbons, nitric oxide (smog and medications) and oral contraceptives and
environmental estrogens, in particular.** Of these factors, only radiation and
lead exposure have decreased in the last several years, after several decades
of rapid increase. The widespread use of diuretics in pregnancy, which began
in the 1950s and contributed to an epidemic of premature births, also declined
after the late 1960s. Most of these environmental factors damage the thymus
gland, which regulates the immune system, and by acting on the thymus their
effects tend to be additive with other immunosuppressive factors, including
cancer, traumatic injury, inflammation, toxins in spoiled food (e.g.,
aflatoxins) and malnutrition.  
  
Cancer, AIDS, and extreme hypothyroidism have several features in common--they
cause tissue loss and organ damage, with immunodeficiency and intense
activation of the stress hormones, including cortisol. In cancer and AIDS, a
good case has been made for the primacy of stress-induced wasting as the main
cause of death. Whatever one might believe to be the cause of cancer and AIDS,
it is always good for the patient to prevent tissue damage from the stress
associated with the sickness. Since the stress hormones primarily destroy
tissues by the activation of specific proteases, the use of protease
inhibitors for treating AIDS could conceivably be affecting the stress
response. However, the body's normal protection against the cortisol-activated
proteases is centered on the protective hormones, progesterone, thyroid, and
the androgens.  
  
**Environmental stress  
**One of the most broadly substantiated principles in biology is that a great
variety of harmful causes all lead to a few forms of biological harm--the
concept of the stress reaction shows the powerful implications of the
principle. Stress, no matter what the specific cause, has a particularly
destructive effect on three organ systems **:** The nervous system, the immune
system, and the reproductive system. Inflammation, lipid peroxidation, tissue
atrophy, the "calcium catastrophe" (when almost anything goes wrong, calcium
can transmit and amplify and extend the problem, but isn't itself the source
of the problem), mitochondrial decay, and similar events help to define the
stress reaction in greater detail.  
Hans Selye showed that the thymus shrinks very early in the stress reaction.
In his understanding of the process, when adaptation was followed by the
"exhaustion phase," the adrenal glands had simply become exhausted from
overuse. F. Z. Meerson's work showed that cortisol, and the free fatty acids
mobilized by stress, have a toxic influence on the mitochondrial energy
production system. Both cortisol and the free fatty acids block the efficient
use of glucose for producing energy, creating a diabetes-like condition. The
exhaustion problem caused by excessive stress is generalized, not just a
matter of adrenal insufficiency.  
Meerson's work created the basis for undersanding several degenerative
processes, especially the phenomenon of "excitotoxicity," in which the
combination of excessive stimulation and deficient energy supply damages or
kills cells.  
Selye believed that some hormones are antagonistic to each other. A few of the
oppositions that he identified have been thoroughly researched, especially the
catabolic/anabolic functions of glucocorticoids and androgens, and the
shock/antishock functions of estrogen and progesterone, respectively.  
Puberty, because of hormonal changes, especially increased estrogen, can be
seen as the first stage of a chronic stress, resembling diabetes, since
elevated free fatty acids cause "insulin resistance," with slightly impaired
oxidation of glucose. The thymus shrinks considerably at puberty, under the
influence of the hormonal changes and the increased free fatty acids (caused
mainly by estrogen). The degenerative diseases can be seen as the cumulative
result of stress, in which tissue damage results from the diabetes-like
impairment of energy production.  
  
The thymus, and the thymus-dependent areas of the spleen, are required for
full and subtle control of immunity. In the absence of thymic control, the B
cells are still able to produce antibodies, but they are more likely to
produce autoantibodies.  
  
Stress produces a variety of cellular changes, including the production of the
"shock proteins." These proteins can make up 20% of the cell's total protein
content. In themselves, the shock proteins are immunosuppressive. They can be
recognized by the immune system as antigens, and so are a factor in the
appearance of "autoimmune" antibodies. The autoantibodies themselves are often
blamed for the diseases they are sometimes associated with, but since they can
be present (for example, following removal of the spleen) in people who have
no symptoms, their function is probably to facilitate the removal of tissues
which are defective for some other reason. The shock proteins could be one of
the signals that activate the immune system to remove damaged tissue, and they
might be involved in the removal of senescent cells, though I don't think any
experiments have been done to test this idea.  
  
Besides activating the cells to produce massive amounts of the shock proteins,
stress can also activate the so-called hormone receptors, such as estrogen
receptors, even in the absence of the hormones. Stress also activates the
endonucleases, which cut sections out of the DNA molecules, and activates
mobile genetic elements, producing genetic instability. Like cortisol and
estrogen, stress itself activates integrated retroviruses. The "endogenous
retroviruses" make up nearly 10% of the human genome, and many of them locate
themselves in regulatory sites in the chromosomes.  
Since stress lowers the discriminatory ability of the immune system, and
stimulates the expression of retroviruses, the antibodies sometimes seen in
association with immunodeficiency may be similar to the various autoantibodies
that are also produced by stress.  
People who have autoimmune diseases such as lupus and Sjogrens syndrome (which
are promoted by estrogen **:** Ahmed and Talal) have antibodies which
sometimes react positively in the AIDS test, and searches for the HIV virus in
such people have found no evidence of it. (Nelson, et al., 1994 **;** Deas, et
al., 1998.) Treatments for roundworms and other parasites cause antibodies to
retroviruses to appear in animals that previously tested negative **;** this
might account for the high rates of positive tests for HIV in areas such as
Africa in which treatment for filiariasis is common (Kitchen and Cotter,
1988).  
  
Organisms are most sensitive to environmental damage early in life, especially
prenatally. This is the period in which normal hormone exposure masculinizes
the brain, for example. The term "imprinting" refers to the extreme
responsiveness of the organism at this time, and it has been extended to
include long lasting influences which may result from abnormally high or low
levels of natural substances, or from the presence of other, abnormal
substances during the sensitive period. The effects of early "imprinting" can
cause permanently altered sensitivities. In animal studies, L. C. Strong
showed that prenatal influences determine the age at which puberty and
reproductive senescence occur. In humans, premature birth, a powerful
stressor, is associated with premature puberty. The thymus is damaged both by
premature birth and by puberty. The effects of damage early in life will
increase vulnerability in subsequent decades.  
When babies are imprinted by the mother's disturbed hormones, or by diuretics,
by milk substitutes, or by industrial effluents, the worst effects are likely
to be seen decades later, or even generations later. A similar long-range
effect can be produced by nutritional deficiencies.  
Although more mature organisms are less sensitive to stress, both early
imprinting, and the cumulative effects of exposure, will cause some
individuals to be much more sensitive than others, and aging itself increases
vulnerability.  
  
If the present epidemic of immunodeficiency is produced by environmental
stress, then we should expect to see a variety of other stress-related
diseases increasing at roughly the same time. When a stressor is acting
through imprinting, then the harmful effects may not be seen until 20 or 30
years later, but when the stressor has acute and immediate effects, the
effects should rise and fall at roughly the same time as the environmental
cause.  
  
The rise of the Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome during the last 50 years
hasn't been the only health problem that has grown rapidly during that time.
The "flesh eating bacteria," causing necrotizing fasciitis and related
conditions, should probably be classed along with septicemia/bacteremia as the
consequence of a weakened immune system, but there are many other diseases
that have followed a similar pattern, which might be caused by the same
factors which are causing immunodeficiency. **_Thyroid diseases (mostly in
women), some autoimmune diseases including primary biliary cirrhosis (mostly
in women) and inflammatory bowel disease, liver cancer, diabetes (doubling in
children since 1949), prostate cancer, decreased sperm counts, premature
births and birth defects, minimal brain dysfunction-attention deficit-
hyperactivity, cerebral palsy, premature puberty (which is associated with
premature birth), congestive heart failure, osteoporosis (independently of the
changing age-structure of the population), depression (most common in women,
more than doubling among children in recent decades), and multiple sclerosis
have increased in prevalence during this period._** _Some of these conditions
are strongly associated with each other, for example, primary biliary
cirrhosis, breast cancer, and osteoporosis.  
  
_It is common knowledge, among people who study immunity, that radiation,
polyunsaturated fatty acids, estrogens, and dioxins are toxic to the thymus
gland, and can produce immuno-deficiency. They mimic or accelerate the thymic
atrophy of aging, causing a deficient thymus-dependent immune response,
usually without harming the ability of B cells to produce antibodies. There
are probably many examples of damage to immune systems, besides
immunodeficiency, caused by these agents. Slight damage to the immune system,
such as can be produced by hypoglycemia or other energy deficit--creates an
exaggerated inflammatory response, and the release of the mediators of
inflammation, including histamine, serotonin, and prostaglandins, activates
the stress hormone system, leading to further biological damage. Liver disease
and several other "autoimmune" diseases involve abnormal immune responses,
probably including thymic deficiency and an intensified inflammatory response.
The fact that livers transplanted from female donors to male recipients are
less successful than are livers from male donor transplanted into female
recipients, is consistent with the idea that autoantibodies (which are far
more common in women than in men) are a relatively harmless response to
changes in the organs themselves.  
  
Are antiviral therapies working? Ivan Ilich, in _Medical Nemesis,_ showed that
historically, many diseases have had characteristic incidence curves, rising
to a maximum, and then falling away to relative insignificance, independently
of what people were doing as treatment or prevention. As susceptible people
are exposed to conditions that cause a disease, they will get sick, and then
either die or develop resistance. The conditions which at first caused
increasing disease incidence, will eventually tend to affect only children who
haven't developed resistance.  
If AIDS mortality rose rapidly to a peak a few years ago, and then began
falling, we should ask whether this pattern fits that of other diseases
discussed by Ilich. Looking for causes other than the virus, we might find a
parallel in the rise and fall of some other factor.  
In the 1950s, new diuretics came on the market, and millions of pregnant women
took them. It was predicted that there would be an epidemic of brain damage as
a result, and in fact the incidence of hyperactivity, attention-deficit, and
other "minimal" brain damage disorders did rise during those years. After
about 15-20 years, experiences such as the Thalidomide episode caused
physicians to temper their enthusiasm for the use of drugs during pregnancy.
**The incidence of low birth-weight babies in the U.S. peaked around 1965, and
28 years later AIDS mortality in the US peaked.** The rising curve had
followed both the increase in radioactive fallout from atmospheric testing of
large numbers of atomic bombs up to 1963, and the intense promotion of the new
diuretics beginning in the early 1950s. The peak in AIDS mortality in 1993
came ten or twelve years after the long decline in SAT scores had stopped.
(The most extreme declines in SAT scores had occurred among the brightest
students, disproving the contention that the average score fell simply because
more students were taking the tests.) The same prenatal damage which caused
the extreme decline in SAT scores 18 years later (when the damaged babies
reached that age) would have left many of the same individuals with weakened
immune systems, which would fail prematurely, but at varying intervals,
depending on the exposure to other factors.  
The use of unleaded gasoline increased into the 1990s, and there was a
corresponding decrease in tissue lead content, reflecting the smaller amount
of lead being put into the environment. According to some reports, medical and
dental x-ray exposures were declining during this period. Yet other factors,
including dioxins and unsaturated dietary fats, were probably increasing.  
Although the new protease inhibitors wouldn't be used until years after the
AIDS mortality had begun falling, the government and drug companies are
claiming that it is the drugs which are decreasing the mortality.  
  
**A Synthesis  
**Many things in our environment are increasing the incidence of certain kinds
of liver disease. The liver processes things that are ingested or that enter
the blood stream after being inhaled or absorbed through the skin, so in a
toxic environment it is susceptible to injury. If deprived of good nutrition
or adequate thyroid hormone it is especially sensitive to toxins. The body's
own estrogen is a burden on the liver, causing women's livers to be on average
slower than men's in processing enviornmental chemicals.  
Almost any kind of toxin causes the liver to be less efficient at excreting
other substances, including hormones. In malnutrition, sickness, and in aging,
there is a tendency for higher levels of estrogen to remain circulating in the
blood.  
Natural estrogen, and environmental substances that act like estrogen, act as
excitants in many types of cell, and at the same time, reduce the efficiency
of energy production. Both of these properties relate to its known ability to
activate the adrenal glands. A. L. Soderwall, who was my thesis adviser at the
University of Oregon, found that estrogen caused hamsters' adrenal glands to
enlarge, and that larger doses overstimulated the glands sufficiently to cause
tissue damage. It is now known that estrogen acts directly on the adrenal
cells to stimulate cortisol production, and that it also stimulates the
pituitary to produce more adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), which also stimulates
the adrenals **;** estrogen's effect is to impair the negative feedback, in
which cortisol normally shuts down ACTH production. This impaired feedback is
characteristic of aging.  
Estrogen directly causes the thymus gland to atrophy, and several of its
effects, such as increased adrenal activity and elevated free fatty acids,
also contribute to the shrinkage of the thymus and the inhibition of its
functions. While this is happening, the B cells, which normally are under the
control of the thymus cells, are not killed by estrogen, and actually seem to
be stimulated by estrogen to produce certain types of antibodies. This
combination of effects, weakening the thymus and stimulating antibody
production, is thought to contribute to the development of autoimmune
diseases. Estrogen also stimulates mast cells and similar cells to release
histamine and other promoters of inflammation, and these effects are probably
closer to the actual problem in the autoimmune diseases. Several of the
substances formed under the influence of estrogen interfere with energy
production and contribute to cellular excitation, causing tissue injury.  
Cortisol also stimulates antibody production while suppressing thymic immunity
(Norbiato, et al., 1997).  
Estrogen and stress cause increased levels of free fatty acids to circulate.
The polyunsaturated fatty acids are immunosuppressive, antithyroid,
diabetogenic, inhibit respiration, and promote the actions of estrogen and
cortisol.  
People suffering from AIDS have been found to have increased estrogen, with
high cortisol and ACTH, and very low T3. (Unfortunately, some researchers and
the editors who publish their ideas, conclude that the hormones don't cause
the stress and wasting symtpoms, because they call thyroid a "catabolic
hormone," and because they describe the fatigue and sodium deficiency as
evidence of "deficiency of cortisol." Such is the state of the research
establishment.)  
In animal experiments, and a few human tests, the HIV and similar viruses have
produced effects that could plausibly explain some of the conditions seen in
AIDS, such as damage to brain cells (C. Pert, R. Sapolsky), and altered
steroid secretion. But this is real science, that promises to link up with
information about stress, aging, allergy, and biological adaptability.  
For example, Sapolsky's group (Brooke, et al., 1998) found that the nerve
toxicity caused by a viral protein (called gp120) synergizes with
glucocorticoid toxicity, lowering the ATP level and inhibiting mitochondrial
function, and that simply supplying the nerve with additional energy protects
it from destruction. In other words, the viral peptide just increases
excitotoxicity.  
Another group (Amirhessami-Aghili and Spector, 1991) found that the presence
of the virus can decrease the production of progesterone. Since progesterone
blocks (Lee, et al., 1997) the expression (and transmission) of the virus,
this suggests how the overgrowth of the virus might be triggered by stress--
once progesterone synthesis falls, a vicious circle could get started.  
Lee, et al., found that progesterone can help to prevent transmission of the
virus from an infected mother to the fetus. But the most interesting study of
the virus in pregnancy involved mice that were engineered to contain extremely
large quantities of the HIV provirus (De, et al., 1997). At birth, they seemed
normal, but within a few days their skin became diseased, and they quickly
wasted away and died. The experimenters realized that something present in the
mother's body had permitted normal development up to the point of birth, and
then the wasting disease set in. The placental hormone, chorionic
gonadotropin, is produced in large amounts during pregnancy. The experimenters
gave newborn infected mice regular doses of human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG), and they developed normally.  
Rodents don't respond to gonadotropins or other ovarian stimulation exactly
the way pigs and primates and people do. For example, prolactin and melatonin
usually inhibit progesterone synthesis in people, but in rodents, they
increase it. So it's necessary to see exactly what happens to the ovarian
hormones when a mouse is given hCG. In 1996, another group (H. Krzanowska and
M. Szoltys) had done that, and found that hCG greatly **increases progesterone
synthesis, but decreases estrogen.  
**Considering the progesterone-HIV experiments together, I am reminded of a
science fiction movie, in which a disease from another planet killed everyone
in the lab that was studying it, except for one woman, who turned out to be
pregnant.  
  
The medical version of AIDS research, though, pushes aside all of the real
science, in favor of a simplistic idea that the virus kills the cells of the
immune system, and uses false diagnostic methods and deadly drugs to treat
something which too often doesn't exist, while denying that there are other
real causes of immune deficiency and wasting-sickness, etc.  
  
Aging is characterized by loss of lean body mass, immunodeficiency, and a
variety of autoimmune reactions. My perennial argument has been that decreased
thyroid and progesterone, associated with increased estrogen and stress
hormones, are largely responsible for those changes. The huge investment in
AIDS research has found that these occur in AIDS, but, because of the medical
pharmaceutical culture which has created myths about these hormones, no one is
yet interpreting the hormone imbalances in ways that would reveal their
responsibility for the symptoms. While the institutionalized theory claims
that the HIV virus is responsible for the syndrome, the hormones are reduced
to epiphenomena.  
  
**REFERENCES  
  
**

Ann Med 1996 Apr;28(2):107-13. **Histamine-2 receptor antagonists as
immunomodulators: new therapeutic views?** Nielsen HJ. Considerable evidence
has emerged to suggest that histamine participates in the regulation of the
inflammatory response, immune reaction, coagulation cascade, and
cardiovascular function. **The beneficial effect of histamine-2 receptor
antagonists as adjuvant single drugs to reduce trauma-, blood transfusion- and
sepsis-induced immunosuppression has led to research in combined treatment
regimens in major surgery, particularly, of patients operated on for malignant
diseases.  
**J Am Coll Nutr 1982;1(2):207-14. **Auto-immune complications of
D-penicillamine--a possible result of zinc and magnesium depletion and of
pyridoxine inactivation.** Seelig MS. Pyridoxine is necessary for cellular
accumulation of zinc **and magnesium, deficiencies of which have caused thymic
and other immunologic abnormalities.**  
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999 Jan 1;214(1):67-70, 43-4.. **Outbreak of fatal
salmonellosis in cats following use of a high-titer modified-live
panleukopenia virus vaccine.** Foley JE, Orgad U, Hirsh DC, Poland A, Pedersen
NC.  
J Immunol 1998 Nov 15;161(10):5313-20 **Apoptotic death of CD8+ T lymphocytes
after immunization: induction of a suppressive population of Mac-1+/Gr-1+
cells.** Bronte V, Wang M, Overwijk WW, Surman DR, Pericle F, Rosenberg SA,
Restifo NP.  
Infect Immun 1998 Sep;66(9):4018-24 **Decreased resistance to primary
intravenous Cryptococcus neoformans infection in aged mice despite adequate
resistance to intravenous rechallenge.** Aguirre KM, Gibson GW, Johnson LL.  
Pediatr Med Chir 1998 May-Jun;20(3):213-6 **[The cell-mediated response after
measles vaccination].** [Article in Italian] Pala S, Crimaldi G, Consolini R,
Macchia P. **Natural measles virus infection is recognized for causing
prolonged abnormalities in immune responses,** that contribute to the severe
and complicated evolution of the disease. Immunization with live measles virus
vaccine could be considered a mild form of the measles infection. The in vitro
proliferative response to polyclonal mitogen was significantly reduced (p <
0.01). This study confirms the presence of a mainly functional
immunosuppression of cellular response in a cohort of children belonging to a
developed area.  
J Neuroimmunol 1998 Dec 1;92(1-2):133-8 **An inhibitor of inducible nitric
oxide synthase ameliorates experimental autoimmune myocarditis in Lewis
rats.** Shin T, Tanuma N, Kim S, Jin J, Moon C, Kim K, Kohyama K, Matsumoto Y,
Hyun B. We studied the effect of nitric oxide (NO) on experimental autoimmune
myocarditis (EAC) in rats. **These results suggest that iNOS is upregulated in
EAC lesions and increased NO production plays an important role in the
development of EAC. In addition, selective iNOS inhibitors may have a
therapeutic role in treating certain autoimmune diseases including EAC.  
**Langenbecks Arch Chir Suppl Kongressbd 1997;114:508-12 **[Necrotizing
fasciitis].** Billing A, Arendt RM, Arnoldt H, Schildberg FW Necrotizing
fasciitis has changed considerably over time.  
Clin Infect Dis 1998 Mar;26(3):584-9 **Invasive group A streptococcal disease
in Taiwan is not associated with the presence of streptococcal pyrogenic
exotoxin genes.** Hsueh PR, Wu JJ, Tsai PJ, Liu JW, Chuang YC, Luh KT. **High-
level protease activity and the M1 serotype of the isolates were significantly
associated with the clinical signs of STSS and with mortality. M1 serotype and
protease activity, as well as host immune status,** might play significant
roles in the pathogenesis of invasive GAS disease in Taiwan.  
Can J Surg 1997 Feb;40(1):18-25 **Group A Streptococcus invasive infections: a
review.** Weiss KA, Laverdiere M. **The incidence of group A Streptococcus
(GAS) invasive infections has been increasing worldwide,** **and there is no
obvious explanation for this phenomenon**.  
Unfallchirurg 1993 Apr;96(4):181-91 **[Necrotizing soft tissue infections].**
[Article in German] Kach K, Kossmann T, Trentz O. Necrotizing soft tissue
infections are a group of life- and limb-threatening infections. They are
**caused by aerobic and anaerobic bacteria occasionally in a synergistic
polymicrobial combination. The literature describing necrotizing soft tissue
infections is controversial and often contradictory.  
**Ann Dermatol Venereol 1993;120(6-7):469-72 [Epidemiology and etiopathogeny
of necrotizing fasciitis and streptococcal shock syndrome]. Simonart T,
Simonart JM, Schoutens C, Ledoux M, De Dobbeleer G. **A significant increase
in the frequency of necrotizing fasciitis caused by streptococci of group A
has recently been noted. The disease usually appears in individuals without
obvious risk factors.** **The sensitivity of the host is linked to the genetic
expression of the V. beta. elements on the surface of lymphocytes.  
**J Infect 1989 May;18(3):231-48 **Invasive streptococcal infections in the
era before the acquired immune deficiency syndrome: a 10 years' compilation of
patients with streptococcal bacteraemia in North Yorkshire.** Barnham M.
Significant streptococcal (non-pneumococcal, non-enterococcal) bacteraemia was
detected in 100 patients in two Health Districts of North Yorkshire in the
decade 1978-1988.  
Transpl Immunol 1998 Jun;6(2):84-93 **Stress protein-induced
immunosuppression: inhibition of cellular immune effector functions following
overexpression of haem oxygenase (HSP 32).** Woo J, Iyer S, Cornejo MC, Mori
N, Gao L, Sipos I, Maines M, Buelow R. **The results indicate that
overexpression of HO results in the inhibition of several immune effector
functions and thus provides an explanation for stress-induced
immunosuppression.  
**Genome 1998 Oct;41(5):662-8. **A single-primer PCR-based retroviral-related
DNA polymorphism shared by two distinct human populations.** Deb P, Klempan
TA, O'Reilly RL, Singh SM Department of Zoology, University of Western
Ontario, London, Canada. **"Almost 10% of the human genome consists of DNA
sequences that share homology with retroviruses.** These sequences, which
represent a stable component of the human genome **(although some may retain
the ability to transpose),** remain poorly understood." "Such novel
polymorphisms should provide useful markers and permit assessment of
evolutionary mechanisms associated with retroviral-related genomic evolution.
"  
Gen Pharmacol 1998 May;30(5):685-7, **Imprinting of thymic glucocorticoid
receptor and uterine estrogen receptor by a synthetic steroid hormone at
different times after birth.** Csaba G, Inczefi-Gonda A.  
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998 Dec;83(12):4373-81. **Human immunodeficiency
virus induction of corticotropin in lymphoid cells.** Hashemi FB, Hughes TK,
Smith EM.  
Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1988 Jul;24(7):1179-83. **Abnormal free fatty acids
and cortisol concentrations in the serum of AIDS patients.** Christeff N,
Michon C, Goertz G, Hassid J, Matheron S, Girard PM, Coulaud JP, Nunez EA. The
serum free fatty acid (FFA), cortisol and urinary creatinine,
17-hydzoxycorticosteroid and 17-oxosteroid concentrations of acquired
immunedeficiency syndrome (AIDS-I: beginning and AIDS-II: end phase) and AIDS-
related complex (ARC) patients were determined. Both groups were compared to a
control group (healthy men). ARC and AIDS-I patients. The ratios of stearic
(C18:0) to oleic (C18:1) acid were 75%, P less than 0.01 (ARC) and 45%, P less
than 0.05 (AIDS-I) greater than normal, due to a decrease in the relative
percentage of monounsaturated fatty acids by 25%, P less than 0.001 (ARC) and
20%, P less than 0.01 (AIDS-I). In contrast, **the relative percentage of
polyunsaturated fatty acids was 85% greater than normal (P less than 0.001) in
ARC and 100% greater than normal (P less than 0.001) in AIDS-I patients.**
Total FFA levels did not differ from controls. Serum cortisol levels were 35%
(P less than 0.01) above normal in ARC and 60% (P less than 0.001) above
normal in AIDS-I patients. Urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroids and
17-oxosteroids were very low (2-3-fold lower than normal values, P less than
0.001) in both groups of patients. Urinary creatinine did not differ from
controls. In AIDS-II patients the total FFA concentration was below normal 35%
(P less than 0.01) and the stearic/oleic acid ratio was 50% above normal (P
less than 0.05). The relative percentages of monounsaturated and
polyunsaturated fatty acids in this group were similar to those of controls.
**Serum cortisol concentrations were significantly higher, 50% (P less than
0.001), but the urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroids and 17-oxosteroids were
2-fold lower** (P less than 0.001) than those of controls. Urinary creatinine
did not differ from controls.  
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992 May;74(5):1045-52. **Lipids, lipoproteins,
triglyceride clearance, and cytokines in human immunodeficiency virus
infection and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.** Grunfeld C, Pang M,
Doerrler W, Shigenaga JK, Jensen P, Feingold KR. Infection causes disturbances
in lipid metabolism that may be mediated by cytokines. Therefore we studied
plasma lipids, lipoproteins, triglyceride (TG) metabolism, and serum cytokines
in three groups: patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome **(AIDS)
without active secondary infection,** patients with evidence of human
immunodeficiency virus infection but without clinical AIDS (HIV+), and
controls. **Plasma TGs and FFA were increased in AIDS,** while plasma
cholesterol, high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, apolipoprotein-A-1
(Apo-A-1), low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and Apo-B-100 levels
were decreased.  
J Virol 1991 May;65(5):2231-6. **Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection
of human placenta: potential route for fetal infection.** Amirhessami-Aghili
N, Spector SA.  
AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1997 Sep 20;13(14):1235-42. **Interaction of
pregnancy steroid hormones and zidovudine in inhibition of HIV type 1
replication in monocytoid and placental Hofbauer cells: implications for the
prevention of maternal-fetal transmission of HIV.** Lee AW, Mitra D, Laurence
J.  
Folia Biol (Krakow) 1996;44(3-4):111-6. **Preovulatory dynamics of ovarian
steroid hormones in two mouse strains differing in the rate of meiotic
maturation.** Krzanowska H, Szoltys M.  
J Clin Invest 1997 Apr 1;99(7):1484-91. **Human chorionic gonadotropin hormone
prevents wasting syndrome and death in HIV-1 transgenic mice.** De SK,
Wohlenberg CR, Marinos NJ, Doodnauth D, Bryant JL, Notkins AL., Metabolism
1993 Oct;42(10):1270-6.  
Indices of function and weight loss in human immunodeficiency virus infection
and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Grunfeld C, Pang M, Doerrler W,
Jensen P, Shimizu L, Feingold KR, Cavalieri RR.  
Int J Health Serv 1994;24(2):311-35 **Nuclear fallout, low birthweight, and
immune deficiency. Gould JM, Sternglass EJ** Radiation and Public Health
Project, New York, NY 10024. An investigation of the mortality rates of young
adults born in the postwar period of large-scale atmospheric nuclear testing
(1945-1965) in the United States and other western industrial nations reveals
an increasingly anomalous rise in mortality from its previous secular decline.
Beginning in the **late 1970s and particularly since 1983, the deterioration
in the health of the 25-44 age group is related to in utero exposure to
fission products in the milk and diet, associated with an unprecedented rise
in underweight births and neonatal mortality known to be accompanied by loss
of immune resistance.** The 1945-1965 rise **in the percentage of live births
below 2500 grams is highly correlated with the amount of strontium-90 in human
bone, both peaking in the mid-1960s.** In the 1980s, for the baby boom
generation (those born **between 1945 and 1965), cancer incidence and
mortality due to infectious diseases associated with a** rising degree of
immune deficiency, such as pneumonia, septicemia, and AIDS, increased sharply.
This process of increasing immune deficiency appears to have been exacerbated
by continuing secondary exposures to accidental reactor releases and by an
acceleration of radiation-induced mutation of pathogenic microorganisms
increasingly resistant to drugs.  
Biokhimiia 1987 Sep;52(9):1501-11 **[Activation of lipolysis and ketogenesis
in tumor-bearing animals as a reflection of chronic stress states].**
Chekulaev VA, Shelepov VP, Pasha-zade GR, Shapot VS.  
Arkh Patol 1987;49(6):10-8 **[Combination of immunodepression and disorders in
nucleic acid metabolism of lymphoid tissue as a manifestation of a
paraneoplastic syndrome].** [Article in Russian] Potapova GI, Shapot VS
Several physiological, biochemical, and molecular biological approaches to the
study of factors determining immunodepression in tumor-bearing animals are
considered. Cancer cells release substances of nucleic and peptide nature that
suppress the functional activity of macrophages and lymphocytes and stimulate
cell proliferation in organs and tissues of the host. Suppressor T cells
capable of inhibiting the function of helper T cells and impairing the
differentiation of killer T cells are activated. The suppression **of T- and
B-cell-mediated immunity in the tumor host involves disturbances of nucleic
acid metabolism in those cells as well as hypersecretion of glucocorticoids.**
The impairments of lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation that result in
reduced immune responsiveness are attributable to drastic alterations in the
metabolism of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides and to the damage sustained by
the lymphocyte's DNA.  
Eksp Onkol 1987;9(6):62-7 **[Relation between disorders of glucose metabolism,
secretion of somatotropic hormone, thyroxine, thyrotropin and hematocrit
indices in rats with transplanted hepatomas].** Shelepov VP, Pasha-zade GR,
Chekulaev VA, Shapot VS.  
Am J Pathol 1987 Jan;126(1):103-13 **Dietary fatty acid effects on T-cell-
mediated immunity in mice** **infected with mycoplasma pulmonis or given
carcinogens by injection.** Bennett M, Uauy R, Grundy SM. To test whether or
not diets enriched in w-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids are significantly
immunosuppressive . . . mice were fed diets enriched for fatty acids: linoleic
(POLY), oleic (MONO), palmitic (SAT), or eicosapentanoic (FISH). . . . only
mice on the **POLY diet were significantly immunosuppressed, and only T-cell-
mediated cutaneous sensitivity reactions were affected.** After instillation,
mice on the POLY and MONO diets were suppressed for T-cell cutaneous
responses. Deliberate infection with Mycoplasma pulmonis resulted in
suppressed cutaneous T-cell responses in the POLY group of C3B6F1 mice, and
aspirin partially reversed the immunosuppression. Mice on the FISH diet were
resistant to immunosuppression. It is tentatively concluded that diets rich in
w-6 polyunsaturated diets, while not **directly immunosuppressive, do
predispose animals to suppression of certain T-cell-mediated immune responses.
This immunosuppression can be "triggered" by infection and/or by exposure to
carcinogens.  
**Tumour Biol 1988;9(5):225-32 **Modulation of cell-mediated immune response
by steroids and free fatty acids in AIDS patients: a critical survey.** Nunez
EA. The overall data presented in this review show that cortisol and free
fatty acids, in particular long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, each have
immunoinhibitory properties on lymphoblastic transformation of **certain T
lymphocytes. This effect is enhanced when the two factors are associated.
These data could explain in part the immunosuppression observed in acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients where enhanced concentrations of
cortisol and polyunsaturated fatty acids have been observed.  
**Basic Life Sci 1988;49:615-20 **Vitamin E and immune functions**. Bendich A.
Supplementation of these diets with higher than nutritionally adequate
**levels of vitamin E enhances immune responses. High levels of PUFA are
immunosuppressive, and vitamin E can partially overcome this
immunosuppression. High levels of vitamin C can protect tissue levels of**
vitamin E and may indirectly contribute to the immunoenhancement by vitamin E.
Severe selenium deficiency is immunosuppressive. Vitamin E can protect some
aspects of immune responses from the adverse effects of selenium deficiency.
These data clearly indicate that nutrients that affect the overall antioxidant
status have important effects on immune functions. In addition, antioxidant
nutrient interactions can synergize to overcome the adverse effects of
polyunsaturated fatty acids on immune functions.  
Transplantation 1989 Jul;48(1):98-102 **Enhancement of immunosuppression by
substitution of fish oil for olive oil as a vehicle for cyclosporine.** Kelley
VE, Kirkman RL, Bastos M, Barrett LV, Strom TB.  
J Am Coll Nutr 1992 Oct;11(5):512-8 **Role of nutrition in the management of
malnutrition and immune dysfunction of trauma.** Cerra FB Dept. of Clinical
Nutrition, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Current nutrition support
improves patient outcome in trauma patients. It appears to do so by limiting
the adverse effects of specific nutrient or generalized nutrient deficiencies.
Immunosuppression, however, continues as a significant clinical problem. This
**immunosuppression appears to be part of the inflammatory response that
accompanies trauma, and in part, to represent the need for conditional**
nutrients in this setting. Three nutrients that are being evaluated include
arginine, uracil as ribonucleic acid and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Animal studies report improved immune function. Early clinical trials are
reporting improved immune function and patient outcomes.  
J Nutr 1996 Mar;126(3):681-92 **Dietary butter protects against ultraviolet
radiation-induced suppression of contact hypersensitivity in Skh:HR-1 hairless
mice.** Cope RB, Bosnic M, Boehm-Wilcox C, Mohr D, Reeve VE. Dietary fats
modulate a wide variety of T cell functions in mice and humans. This study
examined the effects of four different dietary fats, predominantly
polyunsaturated sunflower oil, margarine, and predominantly saturated butter,
clarified butter, on the T cell-mediated, systemic suppression of contact
hypersensitivity by ultraviolet radiation. There was a linear relationship (r
> 0.9) between protection against **photoimmunosuppression and the proportion
of clarified butter in mice fed a series of 200 g/kg mixed fat** diets that
provided varying proportions of clarified butter and sunflower oil. The
dietary fats did not modulate the contact hypersensitivity reaction in
unirradiated animals. The observed phenomena were not primary due to the
carotene, tocopherol, cholecalciferol, retinol, lipid hydroperoxide or the
nonfat solid content of the dietary fats used and appeared to be a result of
the different fatty acid composition of the fats.  
Cancer Lett 1996 Nov 29;108(2):271-9 **Dependence of photocarcinogenesis and
photoimmunosuppression in the hairless mouse on dietary polyunsaturated fat.**
Reeve VE, Bosnic M, Boehm-Wilcox C. The photocarcinogenic response was of
increasing severity as the polyunsaturated content of the mixed dietary fat
was increased, whether measured as tumour incidence, tumour multiplicity,
progression of benign tumours to squamous cell carcinoma, or reduced survival.
When mice were exposed acutely to UV radiation (UVR), a **diet of 20%
saturated fat provided almost complete protection from the suppression of CHS,
whereas feeding 20% polyunsaturated fat resulted in 57% suppression** ; the
CHS of unirradiated mice was unaffected by the nature of the dietary fat.
These results suggest that the enhancement of photocarcinogenesis by the
dietary polyunsaturated fat component is mediated by an induced
**predisposition to persistent immunosuppression** caused by the chronic UV
irradiation, and supports the evidence for an immunological role in dietary
fat modulation of photocarcinogenesis in mice.  
Ann Acad Med Singapore 1991 Jan;20(1):84-90. **Clinical implications of food
contaminated by aflatoxins.** Hendrickse RG.  
Arch Toxicol 1996;70(10):661-71. **Host resistance to rat cytomegalovirus
(RCMV) and immune function in adult PVG rats fed herring from the contaminated
Baltic Sea.** Ross PS, Van Loveren H, de Swart RL, van der Vliet H, de Klerk
A, Timmerman HH, van Binnendijk R, Brouwer A, Vos JG, Osterhaus AD. In a semi-
field study, we previously showed that harbour seals (Phoca vitulina) **fed
herring from the contaminated Baltic Sea had lower natural killer cell
activity, T-lymphocyte functionality and delayed-type hypersensitivity
responses** than seals fed herring from the relatively uncontaminated Atlantic
Ocean. A novel model was established to assess the specific T-cell response to
rat cytomegalovirus (RCMV). When applied to the feeding study, no differences
between the Atlantic and Baltic groups in the RCMV-induced proliferative
T-lymphocyte responses could be detected, but virus titres in salivary glands
of infected rats of the Baltic Sea group were higher. These elevated RCMV
**titres and changes in thymus cellularity** suggest that the dietary exposure
to low levels of contaminants may have been immunotoxic at a level which our
immune function test could not otherwise detect. While the herring diet per se
appeared to have **an effect on several immune function parameters, lower
plasma thyroid hormone levels in the Baltic Sea group of rats confirmed that
exposure to the environmental mixture of contaminants led to adverse PHAH-
related health effects.  
**Environ Health Perspect 1995 Apr;103(4):366-71 **Dioxin activates HIV-1 gene
expression by an oxidative stress pathway requiring a functional cytochrome
P450 CYP1A1 enzyme.** Yao Y, Hoffer A, Chang CY, Puga A. **Aflatoxin B1,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p -dioxin ** (TCDD; dioxin) and benzo[a]pyrene
cause a significant increases in CAT expression in mouse hepatoma Hepa-1
cells. We conclude that induction of a functional CYP1A1 monooxygenase by TCDD
stimulates a pathway that generates thiol-sensitive reactive oxygen
intermediates which, in turn, are responsible for the TCDD-dependent
activation of genes linked to the LTR. These data might provide an explanation
for findings that TCDD increases infectious HIV-1 titers in experimental
systems and for **epidemiologic reports suggesting that exposure to aromatic
hydrocarbons, such as found in cigarette smoke, is associated with an
acceleration in AIDS progression.  
**Ann Trop Med Parasitol 1997 Oct;91(7):787-93 **Of sick turkeys, kwashiorkor,
malaria, perinatal mortality, heroin addicts and food poisoning: research on
the influence of aflatoxins on child health in the tropics.** Hendrickse RG.
Aflatoxin exposure occurs in > or = 30% of pregnancies in tropical Africa and
the toxins are often in cord blood, sometimes at extremely high
concentrations. Aflatoxins are now incriminated in neonatal jaundice and there
is circumstantial evidence that they cause perinatal death and reduced
birthweight. Aflatoxin-induced immunosuppresion may explain the aggressive
behaviour of HIV infection in Africa. There are similarities between
observations on HIV cases in Africa and those on heroin addicts in Europe,
where 'street' heroin is frequently contaminated with aflatoxin. Aflatoxins
were found in 20% of random urine samples from heroin addicts in the U.K. and
the Netherlands.  
Ann N Y Acad Sci 1986;475:320-8. **Hormonal approaches to immunotherapy of
autoimmune disease.** Talal N, Ahmed SA, Dauphinee M.  
Cell Immunol 1998 Nov 1;189(2):125-34. **Estrogen increases the number of
plasma cells and enhances their autoantibody production in nonautoimmune
C57BL/6 mice.** Verthelyi DI, Ahmed SA.  
J Rheumatol 1987 Jun;14 Suppl 13:21-5. **Interleukin 2, T cell receptor and
sex hormone studies in autoimmune mice.** Talal N, Dang H, Ahmed SA, Kraig E,
Fischbach M. The **administration of estrogen to pregnant mice late in
gestation results in offspring with a permanently altered immune system. These
mice develop features of autoimmunity similar to those that occur
spontaneously in genetically susceptible autoimmune mice. T** his phenomenon
may have etiopathological significance for familial SLE.  
Endocrinology 1994 Dec;135(6):2615-22. **17 beta-estradiol, but not 5 alpha-
dihydrotestosterone, augments antibodies to double-stranded deoxyribonucleic
acid in nonautoimmune C57BL/6J mice.** Verthelyi D, Ahmed SA.  
J Autoimmun 1993 Jun;6(3):265-79 **Antibodies to cardiolipin in normal
C57BL/6J mice: induction by estrogen but not dihydrotestosterone.** Ahmed SA,
Verthelyi D.  
J Autoimmun 1989 Aug;2(4):543-52. **Estrogen induces the development of
autoantibodies and promotes salivary gland lymphoid infiltrates in normal
mice.** Ahmed SA, Aufdemorte TB, Chen JR, Montoya AI, Olive D, Talal N. . . .
normal mice were **prenatally exposed to estrogens.** . . . mice prenatally
exposed to estrogens had accelerated development of autoimmune salivary gland
lesions indistinguishable from Sjogren's syndrome (SS) in humans. Further
experiments are warranted to confirm these findings. The prenatal effects of
estrogen may have relevance for familial and neonatal autoimmune syndromes.  
Isr J Med Sci 1988 Dec;24(12):725-8. **Sex hormones, CD5+ (Lyl+) B-cells, and
autoimmune diseases.** Talal N, Ahmed SA.  
Ann N Y Acad Sci 1986;475:320-8 **Hormonal approaches to immunotherapy of
autoimmune disease.** Talal N, Ahmed SA, Dauphinee M.  
Life Sci 1998;63(20):1815-22. **Exacerbated immune stress response during
experimental magnesium deficiency results from abnormal cell calcium
homeostasis.** Malpuech-Brugere C, Rock E, Astier C, Nowacki W, Mazur A,
Rayssiguier Y. These studies first showed that an **abnormal calcium handling
induced by extracellular magnesium depression in vivo may be at the origin of
exacerbated inflammatory response.  
**Magnes Res 1998 Sep;11(3):161-9. **Early morphological and immunological
alterations in the spleen during magnesium deficiency in the rat.** Malpuech-
Brugere C, Kuryszko J, Nowacki W, Rock E, Rayssiguier Y, Mazur A. Dietary
magnesium deficiency in rodents, and especially in rats, causes inflammation
and leads to alterations in the immune response.  
Ann Rheum Dis 1994 Nov;53(11):749-54 **Polymerase chain reaction fails to
incriminate exogenous retroviruses HTLV-I and HIV-1 in rheumatological
diseases although a minority of sera cross react with retroviral antigens.**
Nelson PN, Lever AM, Bruckner FE, Isenberg DA, Kessaris N, Hay FC.  
Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 1998, Mar;5(2):181-5. **Reactivity of sera from
systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjogren's syndrome patients with peptides
derived from human immunodeficiency virus p24 capsid antigen.** Deas, JE, et
al. **** We have previously demonstrated that **about one-third of patients
with either Sjogren's syndrome (SS) or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
react to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)** p24 core protein antigen without
any evidence of exposure to, or infection with, HIV itself.  
J Clin Lab Immunol 1988 Feb;25(2):101-3. **Effect of diethylcarbamazine on
serum antibody to feline oncornavirus-associated cell membrane antigen in
feline leukemia virus cats.** Kitchen LW, Cotter SM. Department of Cancer
Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston. Diethylcarbamazine
(N,N-diethyl-4-methyl-1- piperazine carboxamide; DEC) is a drug frequently
used for prevention and treatment of the filariases. An opsonic action of DEC
may generate increased immune responses to microfilariae. We tested the
hypothesis that DEC treatment could result in higher antibody levels to other
infectious agents. A retroviral animal model was studied, **in light of the
consideration that use of DEC as an antifilarial agent could conceivably alter
seroepidemiologic surveys as well as serologic outcomes of vaccine trials in
Africa regarding human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).** The effect of DEC
treatment on serum antibody to feline oncornavirus-associated cell membrane
antigen (FOCMA) in domestic cats exposed to feline leukemia virus (FeLV) was
examined. Nine cats that **tested negative before treatment tested positive
(greater than or equal to 1:10 serum dilution, geometric mean titer [GMT] =
278) for antibody to FOCMA after DEC treatment.** Among 19 cats initially
testing positive for FOCMA antibody, higher titers were noted after treatment
in 17 (pretreatment GMT = 264; posttreatment GMT = 6,158). We conclude that a
history of DEC treatment should be considered in evaluating humoral responses
to infectious agents. Whether use of ivermectin, a recently introduced
antifilarial agent, in lieu of DEC will affect clinical expression of HIV
infection in humans also warrants analysis.  

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

