![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Estrogen, memory and heredity: Imprinting and the stress response**  

================================  
IN OUTLINE:  
Stresses, including estrogen excess, activate the Heat Shock Proteins (HSP),
the stress-proteins, a primitive defense system.  
Heat Shock Proteins and "hormone receptors" are closely related and
interdependent.  
Stress (at least partly via HSP) activates viral expression, ordinary gene
expression, and destabilizes the genome, activating the "endonucleases,"
enzymes which break up DNA chains.  
Stress increases genetic variability.  
DNA chains can be chemically modified (e.g., methylated) in a way that limits
enzymes' accesss, probably as protection, and to regulate gene expression.  
Genes, and subsequent growth and development, are modified by the prenatal
hormonal environment, that of the newborn, and even that of the parents before
conception.  
_Genomic imprinting_ makes maternal genes behave differently from paternal
genes.  
_Hormonal imprinting_ early in life sets the pattern of expression of genes.  
"Crossing-over" intermixes the genes on the chromosomes as cells multiply.  
Stresses and regulatory substances can change the patterns of gene expression
that define cell types.  
"Stem cells" are those capable of renewing tissues, and may be "pluripotent,"
able to become glial cells and neurons in the brain, or, in the bone marrow,
to become red blood cells or white blood cells, depending on regulatory
influences.  
"Cloning" animals from body cells strongly suggests that any cell is
potentially totipotent, able to differentiate into any other type of cell.  
We are "imprinted" by our mothers' hormonal and nutritional conditions, but we
can intervene to correct these "inherited" conditions, by maintaining optimal
hormonal and nutritional balances.  
================================  
  
Recent work in several areas of biology is showing that heredity is not
rigidly deterministic, in the way implied by traditional genetics, and it is
opening the way for the development of therapies for incurable, chronic, or
congenital problems, _in natural and holistic ways that don't involve the
mechanistic interventions of "gene therapy" or "genetic engineering."_ For
example, nontoxic treatments for cancer that were demonstrated decades ago,
were discarded because they didn't seem consistent with "genetics." Many
problems that are classified as congenital or genetic, turn out to be
physiological, and correctable. Even the brain and the heart, which until
recently were considered to be incapable of regenerative repair, are now seen
to be capable of great anatomical flexibility.

  
There are still great authoritarian forces opposed to recognizing, and
supporting, the organism's full potential. **The most useful therapies will
remain in obscurity until many people see that those therapies have a firmer
scientific foundation than orthodox (antiquated) medical genetics has.  
  
**Over 100 years ago, Samuel Butler had an argument with Charles Darwin, and
concluded that Darwin was philosophically muddled, and dishonest. Butler was
annoyed that Darwin had belittled the work of his predecessors, including his
grandfather, Erasmus Darwin. Butler was defending the idea of biological
intelligence, the incorporation of experience into physiology and heredity.

  
My parents had an old copy of one of Darwin's books, and I was impressed by
the fact that in his introduction, Darwin was careful to point out that _his
ideas were already being misrepresented, and that he did not hold "natural
selection" to be the only mechanism of evolution,_ but that several factors
were important, including sexual selection and the inheritance of acquired
traits. I suppose those remarks might have been motivated partly by knowing
that Butler didn't approve of the way he was behaving, but they didn't seem to
have much influence on the way history has characterized Darwin's work. All of
my biology professors would have been happier if Darwin had never made those
remarks. I suspect that Darwin's problem was that _any theory of evolution_
was under such heavy attack that he couldn't devote much time to the
relatively minor issue of how evolution works.  
After Darwin's death, the study of heredity made some strange concessions to
the culture of anti-evolutionism. As people began thinking about "particles
that carry heredity," the "genes," ideas from the anti-evolutionist culture
formed much of the context for understanding these "particles."

  
Darwin had suggested that the mature organism reconstitutes itself in the germ
cells, by sending gemmules or pangens (buds or sprouts or derivatives) from
its various parts, so that the parent's traits would be incorporated into the
reproductive cells. This was called pangenesis, meaning that the whole
organism was the source for the new offspring. This theory opened the
possibility for newly acquired traits to be passed on. It grew out of the
experience of animal breeders and horticulturists, who were dedicated to
improving their breeds and strains, _by selecting the best individuals grown
under the best conditions._ It was known that the miniature ponies,
**Shetlands for example, would grow larger each generation when bred under
favorable conditions of domestication, rather than under the harsh conditions
of their native island.** It apparently never occurred to most plant and
animal breeders that they might be able to _improve_ a breed by subjecting it
to harmful conditions.  
Around the end of the 19th century, August Weismann began a systematic attack
on the ideas of Darwin. As part of his campaign, he invented the doctrine that
the reproductive cells are absolutely isolated from the rest of the organism,
and that they are immortal. The rest of the organism is built up by the
_deletion_ of genetic information. This doctrine was very convenient for those
who maintained that all organisms had been created in a single moment, and
that the _appearance_ of evolution resulted from the extinction of some
species, but not the new appearance of some species. Some people, reasoning
from Weismannism, suggested that evolution might have resulted without any
change in the immortal genetic material, except deletion, in a manner
analogous to Weismann's theory of the developing individual. Bacteria, in that
view, would contain all the genes needed to make a tree or a person, and the
more complex forms would have evolved through the differential loss of that
primeval genetic information.

  
The changes produced by _subtraction_ were compatible with the notion of
fallen man in a corrupt world, while the _addition_ of heritable traits
through experience would connote a sharing in the process of creation. The
hereditary particles making up Weismann's "immortal isolated germ line"
connoted a single original creation.

  
As mutations in the genes came to be seen as a reality, experiments with
X-rays suggested to some that all mutations were harmful, and this attitude
blended into the stream of doctrine which insisted that no _improvement_ could
be inherited. Although many experiments showed what seemed to be meaningfully
_directed_ mutations, the doctrine held its ground, as its advocates taught
that mutations were always random. (The doctrine of random change, like the
idea that entropy only increases, excluded acts of creation from the fallen
material world.) If a new trait appeared under new conditions, it was said to
be _only because an old trait was being revealed by the induced loss_ of
another trait.

  
I think anyone who reads the "landmark publications" in genetics will see that
genetics had very little to do with scientific method, as commonly conceived,
and that it had all the traits of a cult. Analysis of the language of genetics
reveals that terms have more often been used to cover up empty speculation
than to clarify situations of fact.

  
Parallel to the way Darwin infuriated Samuel Butler by misrepresenting the
origins of his theory, the neodarwinists who debate the creationists over
school textbooks are ignoring the ways in which the culture of
antievolutionism shaped their own view of genetics.  
  
The discovery of enzymes that produce DNA modeled on RNA, "reverse
transcriptases," began undermining traditional genetics, because it showed
that new information can enter our genome.  
The discovery that bacteria can pass "genes" from one individual to another,
conferring antibiotic resistance upon previously sensitive strains, was a
major nuisance to people working in infectious disease, since it complicates
the treating of disease, but it indicated that "evolution," or genetic change,
was capable of happening in non-random ways.  
  
Early in the study of viral genetics, many people realized that "organisms"
which can't reproduce without their relatively complex hosts, presented a
problem for evolutionary theory. If the virus requires a cell in order to
exist, it is hardly a separate organism. A few people suggested that viruses
were, or were based on, functional normal parts of higher organisms. Some
researchers have suggested that virus-like particles serve to carry
information from one part of an organism to other parts of that organism.
Mobile genetic elements are now well recognized, operating within cells, and
it is common laboratory practice to use viral particles to transfer genetic
material from one cell to another.

  
Cellular systems which cut and splice nucleic acids, creating sequences of
information which don't exist in the inherited chromosomes, are now accepted
parts of cell biology. Hormonal and environmental influences on the stability
of messenger RNA, and on mobile genetic elements, and on genomic stability in
general, are recognized. **_The center of gravity in the study of the nucleic
acids has now shifted from heredity to development.  
  
_Almost nothing remains of Weismannism, which was the foundation of
neodarwinism. The "isolation of the germline" doctrine persists in a few
places, such as explaining why "the ovary runs out of eggs," despite some
examples of egg-cell renewal.**

**  
But when the identity of "germline cells" is found to depend on signals from
the environment, the last vestige of Weismannian germ-line doctrine
disappears.** The only meaning of "germline" is that some cells are destined
to be germ cells, and the meaning disappears when such cells differentiate to
form body parts. (see Donovan, 1998, Labosky, et al., 1994.)

  
The difference between primordial germ cells and embryonic cells is a matter
of "imprinting," the process in which a hormone or "growth factor" or other
"signal" directs a cell down a certain course of differentiation. "Imprinting"
is where genetics and physiology, phylogeny and ontoneny, come together, and
the new facts that are being discovered are removing the last vestige of
scientific content from Weismannism/neodarwinism.  
  
The argument between Peter Duesberg and the virus establishment, in which
Duesberg argues that acquired immunodeficiency is produced by a variety of
causes, including drug use, and the establishment argues that the HIV
retrovirus is the only cause, becomes a little clearer when we consider it in
the context of the larger debate between the genetic determinists and the
Darwinian adaptationists. I will talk about that in more detail in a
newsletter on immunodeficiency.

  
The issues of cancer, aging, and "hormone receptors," are also illuminated by
seeing the organism as capable of adaptive modification of its genes.

  
These newer molecular approaches to the study of biology are vindicating some
of the practical observations of plant and animal breeders, and terms such as
_telegony, heterosis,_ and _xenia_ might come into common use again, along
with _genomic imprinting.  
  
_Here, I want to give examples of "hormonal imprinting" amd "genetic
imprinting," and to show how the idea of the "retrovirus" or "mobile genetic
elements" relates to practical health issues and therapies. The developing egg
cell is constructed and modified in many ways during its growth. The nurse
cells which surround it in the ovarian follicle inject massive quantities of
material, especially RNA, into the expanding egg cell. Regulatory substances
and energy production modify enzyme activities and structural proteins, which
will influence the way it develops after fertilization. During the entire
lifetime of the individual person, the developing egg cells are open to
influences from the organism as a whole. Because of the Weismannian scientific
culture, it's important to start with a few of the clearest interaction
between the environment and the reproductive cell, but many other types of
interaction are starting to be explored.  
  
It has been suggested that environmental stress is responsible for viral
epidemics, by activating viruses in their animal hosts, and causing them to
spread to humans. Whether that's true or not, it is well recognized that
stress causes increased susceptibility to the development of viral infections.
It also causes increased genetic variability, which is logical in the
evolutionary sense, that a species should become more variable when its
environmental niche has changed. The mobile genetic elements that were first
recognized by Barbara McClintock are now considered to be the most important
means by which stress increases genetic variability.  
  
In bacteria (J. Cairns **;** Salyers & Shoemaker, 1996), genetic changes are
known to occur in response to specific substances, which lead to adaptation to
that substance. The mobile elements which are responsible for the defensive
adaptive response to antibiotics are similar to viruses. **In these instances,
the genetic dogma which has been taught very recently in the universities
couldn't have been more clearly disproved. So far, the tendency in the United
States is to concentrate on the details because of their technological
potential (for genetic engineering of lucrative products) and to ignore the
larger biological meaning of this interaction of stress with genetics.**

  
Resistance to antibiotics is transmitted to other bacteria by "injecting,"
during conjugation of a resistant bacterium with a sensitive one, a small
virus-like granule containing the DNA required for detoxifying the antibiotic,
along with some adjoining genes. The antibiotic itself, producing stress,
stimulates the formation of this genetic package. (Whole university courses
used to be devoted to showing why such things couldn't happen.)

  
The enzymes which cut out sections of DNA are the "restrictases," which are
famous for their use in identifying samples of DNA. These "endonucleases" are
activated by stress. In "excitotoxicity," which kills nerve cells through a
combination of intense activation with deficient energy stores (i.e., stress),
these enzymes are activated.  
In apoptosis, or "programmed cell death," these enzymes are activated, along
with enzymes which repair the broken genes, and the resulting energy drain
from an impossible repair job causes the cell's sudden dissolution. Between
excitotoxicity and apoptosis, there are intermediate states, in which the
dissolution is retarded or reversed.

  
When the stress is more generalized, so that the cells survive, the more
sensitive sections of DNA are rearranged within the cell. Some of them may
escape as infective particles.

  
Barbara McClintock wrote about the effects of stress causing genetic
rearrangement, and traced the movements of the mobile genetic elements. At the
same time, without knowing about her work, Leonell Strong was working with
mice, exploring the role of "genetic instability" in causing cancer, and
identifying estrogen and "milk particle," or "milk factor," a virus-like
particle that interacted with estrogen, as causes of breast cancer.  
With only the elements of _stress,_ the _endonucleases,_ and the _mobile
packets of genes,_ adaptively increased variability, and the spreading of
genes among a population can be explained. However, there is a subtler level
at which the adaptations acquired by an indiviual can be passed on to
offspring. This is "imprinting."

  
"Genetic imprinting" is being studied mainly in terms of the covering of
regions of DNA with methyl groups. This is thought to have evolved as a way to
keep the endonucleases from attacking the DNA. Sections of DNA that have been
methylated can be passed on to offspring in that form, and they can be traced
as a pattern of gene activity or inactivity. The maternal genes function in a
manner identifiably different from the paternal genes. Having passed through
the mother's body, the genes have been modified.

  
"Hormonal imprinting" refers to the great changes in sensitivity to hormones
(and related substances) that persist after exposure to that substance early
in life. When the mother's hormones are imbalanced during pregnancy or
nursing, the baby is "imprinted" with an altered sensitivity to hormones.
Leonell Strong showed that these effects could be exaggerated generation after
generation. But--strangely, considering that he was a student of T. H. Morgan,
who is considered to be the founder of classical genetics-- **Strong** **found
that a single treatment, or a series of treatments, with an extract of liver,
or with certain nucleosides (the units for constructing DNA), could reverse
the course of generations of breeding, and eliminate the susceptibility to
cancer.**

**  
**In modern terms, he was probably working with a combination of genetic
imprinting and hormonal imprinting. His "milk factor" very probably was one of
the "endogenous retroviruses," or mobile genetic elements. (However, Gaal, et
al., 1998, found that imprinting factors can be transmitted in the milk.)

  
Movable genetic elements appear to regulate normal developmental processes
(Long, et al., 1998) and the introduction of new particles can "improve
fitness." This is an aspect of the HIV controversy that has been completely
ignored, as far as I can tell. Peter Duesberg argues that the presence of
antibodies to the HIV indicates that the immune system is active, and that
there is no evidence showing the virus to be harmful. My suggestion would be
that the virus is probably present quietly in many people who have no
antibodies to it, and that environmental toxins and other stressors cause it
to be adaptively expressed, creating the possibility for an antibody response.
The "viral particle" itself might be biologically useful, though this wouldn't
exclude the possibility that an abnormal immunological response to it could
have harmful repercussions.

  
The importance of the retroviruses in the human genome hasn't been widely
appreciated. ("almost 10% **. . .** homology with the retroviruses," Deb, et
al, 1998.)

  
Environmental pollution with estrogens and immunosuppressive substances, when
it persists throughout the developmental period, and across generations, will
be dangerous at levels much below those that show an immediate hormonal or
immunosuppressive effect. Tests that determine the "mutagenicity" or
"carcinogenicity" of a substance are performed within a context of a
theoretical genetics which is demonstrably false **;** until the complexities
of imprinting and transgenerational effects are taken into account, it would
be wrong to accept the claim that there are "safe levels," or "thresholds of
harmful effects."

  
When babies are imprinted by the mother's diuretics, by milk substitutes, and
by industrial effluents, the worst effects are likely to be seen decades
later, or even generations later.  
  
There is a simple image that I think makes it possible to grasp as a whole the
unity of things which have been described as existing on different "levels,"
the genetic, the metabolic, and the ecological. This is the image of an
interaction between water and large molecules, such as proteins and nucleic
acids, with the system--the way the large molecule is folded, and the way the
water molecules are ordered--having more than one arrangement, or physical
state, each state differing slightly in the amount of potential energy it
contains. Then, the differences between respiratory energy (producing carbon
dioxide and consuming electron-equivalents), and relatively anaerobic
conditions, determine the probability that the system will return to its
higher energy state after it has been perturbed.

  
A brief perturbation amounts to simple perception and response, reflecting the
basic "irritability" of life, to use Lamarck's term. But with more intense
disturbances, the structures are altered at deeper levels, and structures will
be restored with different degrees of completeness, and the organism will have
adapted, according to its resources, either toward increased "fitness" and
sensitivity, or toward decreased sensitivity.

  
On the level of an individual, the movement away from fitness and sensitivity
would resemble the development of aging and degenerative disease **;** on the
level of a species, it would amount to "reverse evolution," a mammal would
become more reptilian, a primate would become more rodent-like.

  
Protective interventions, and therapies, will consist of things which protect
the structures (preserving sensitivity, while blocking excessive stimulation),
and which increase the energy resources. A great variety of physiological
indicators show that substances such as progesterone, thyroid and carbon
dioxide are acting "universally" as protectants, in ways that make sense only
with some perspective such as this, of the systematic changes in the physical
state of the living substance.  
  
REFERENCES  
  
Taruscio D, et al., **Human endogenous retroviruses and environmental
endocrine disrupters: a connection worth exploring?** Teratology. 1998
Aug;58(2):27-8.

  
Taruscio D, et al., **Human endogenous retroviral sequences: possible roles in
reproductive physiopathology.** Biol Reprod. 1998 Oct;59(4):713-24

  
Genome 1998 Oct;41(5):662-8. **A single-primer PCR-based retroviral-related
DNA polymorphism shared by two distinct human populations.** Deb P, Klempan
TA, O'Reilly RL, Singh SM Department of Zoology, University of Western
Ontario, London, Canada. **"Almost 10% of the human genome consists of DNA
sequences that share homology with retroviruses.** These sequences, which
represent a stable component of the human genome **(although some may retain
the ability to transpose),** remain poorly understood." "Such novel
polymorphisms should provide useful markers and permit assessment of
evolutionary mechanisms associated with retroviral-related genomic evolution.
"

  
Chromosoma 1991 Dec;101(3):141-56 **Integration site preferences of endogenous
retroviruses.** Taruscio D, Manuelidis L. Yale Medical School, New Haven, CT
06510. "Retroviruses have the ability to integrate into the genome of their
host, in many cases with little apparent sequence or site specificity.".
**"Retroviral elements in Alu-rich domains would be expected to be actively
transcribed in all cells. Surprisingly, hybridization to blots of brain RNA
showed an approximately 25 fold lower level of transcripts from these Alu
associated elements than from retroviral sequences restricted to later
replicating, heterochromatic domains." "Each host genome may utilize these
elements for contrary, and possibly beneficial functions."**

**  
**APMIS Suppl 1998;84:37-42 **The potential of integrons and connected
programmed rearrangements for mediating horizontal gene transfer**.. Sundstrom
L. "Site-specific recombination of integrons, mediates transfer of single
genes in small genomes and plasmids. Recent data suggest that new genes are
recruited to the cassettes--the units moved by integrons. Integrons are
resident in a class of transposons with pronounced target selectivity for
resolution loci in **broad host range plasmids. A resulting network of
programmed transfer routes, with potential offshoots reaching into eukaryotic
cells, may channel genes to unexpectedly remote organisms."** "It seems very
clear that integrons and associated programmed transfer mechanisms have high
significance for the dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes in bacteria
whereas further studies are needed to assess their importance for spreading of
arbitrary genes **in a wider range of host systems."**

  
Clin Infect Dis 1996 Dec;23 Suppl 1:S36-43. **Resistance gene transfer in
anaerobes: new insights, new problems.** Salyers AA, Shoemaker NB.
**"Integrated gene transfer elements, called conjugative transposons, appear
to be responsible for much of the transfer of resistance genes among
Bacteroides species. Conjugative transposons not only** transfer themselves
but also mobilize coresident plasmids and excise and mobilize unlinked
integrated elements." "An unusual feature of the Bacteroides conjugative
transposons is that **transfer of many of them is stimulated considerably by
low concentrations of antibiotics. Thus, antibiotics not only select for
resistant strains but also can stimulate transfer of the resistance gene** in
the first place."

  
Genetics 1991 Aug;128(4):695-701 **Adaptive reversion of a frameshift mutation
in Escherichia coli.** Cairns J, Foster PL Department of Cancer Biology,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115\. Mutation rates
are generally thought not to be influenced by selective forces. **This
doctrine rests on the results of certain classical studies of the mutations
that make bacteria resistant to phages and antibiotics.** We have studied a
strain of Escherichia coli which constitutively expresses a lacI-lacZ fusion
containing a frameshift mutation that renders it Lac-. Reversion to Lac+ is
**a rare event during exponential growth but occurs in stationary cultures
when lactose is the only source of energy. No revertants accumulate in the
absence of lactose, or in the presence of lactose if there is another,
unfulfilled requirement for growth.** The mechanism for such mutation in
stationary phase is not known, but it requires some function of RecA which is
apparently not required for mutation during exponential growth.

  
Science 1993 Oct 15;262(5132):317-319. **Whither directed mutation?** Foster,
P.L.

  
Science 1995, 268(5209):418-420. **Adaptive mutation in Escherichia coli: a
role for conjugation.** Radicella JP, Park PU, Fox, M.S.  
Nature 1998 Mar 12;392(6672):141-2 **Are retrotransposons long-term
hitchhikers?** Burke WD, Malik HS, Lathe WC 3rd, Eickbush TH.

  
J Biomol Struct Dyn 1998 Feb;15(4):717-21 **Mammalian retroposons integrate at
kinkable DNA sites.** Jurka J, Klonowski P, Trifonov EN "This suggests that
during interaction with the endonucleolytic enzyme, or enzymes, DNA undergoes
bending at the integration sites and kinks are formed, as initial steps in
generating the nicks. Nicking at kinkable sites, particularly at TA steps, may
also play a role in integration of other insertion elements."

  
J. Mol Evol 1997 Dec;45(6):599-609 **The evolution of MHC diversity by
segmental duplication and transposition of retroelements.** Kulski JK,
Gaudieri S, Bellgard M, Balmer L, Giles K, Inoko H, Dawkins RL.

  
Biochemistry (Mosc) 1997 Nov;62(11):1202-5. **Telomerase is a true reverse
transcriptase. A review.** Cech TR, Nakamura TM, Lingner J Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Colorado,Boulder. **"We find it remarkable that the same type of protein
structure required for retroviral replication is now seen to be essential for
normal chromosome telomere replication in diverse eukaryotes**."

  
Gene 1997 Dec 31;205(1-2):177-82 **Mobile elements inserted in the distant
past have taken on important functions.** Britten RJ.

  
Genetika 1994 Jun;30(6):725-30 **["Adaptive transposition" of retrotransposons
in the Drosophila melanogaster genome accompanying the increase in features of
adaptability].** Beliaeva ES, Pasiukova EG, Gvozdev V.A. . " **The
transpositions were accompanied by a dramatic increase in individual fitness
(competitive success)."**

  
Genetika 1997 Aug;33(8):1083-93 **[Stress induction of retrotransposon
transposition in Drosophila: reality of the phenomenon, characteristic
features, possible role in rapid evolution].** Vasil'eva LA, Ratner VA,
Bubenshchikova EV "This stress response involved mobilization of
retrotransposons." **"In all these cases, stress induction of retrotransposon
transpositions was mediated by molecular mechanisms of the heat shock system-
the general system of cell resistance to external and physiological stress
factors. From the viewpoint of evolution, stress induction of transpositions
is a powerful factor generating new genetic variation in populations under
stressful environmental conditions.** Passing through a "bottleneck," a
population can rapidly and significantly alter its population norm and become
the founder of new, normal forms."

  
Mol Biol (Mosk) 1995 May-Jun;29(3):522-8 **[Conserved regions of potential
ORF1 protein products of mobile elements and retroviral proteins, encoded by
the gag gene].** Kanapin AA, Ivanov VA, Il'in IuV.

  
Radiats Biol Radioecol 1995 May-Jun;35(3):356-63 **[DNA analysis of
retroposon-like genetic LINE elements in blood plasma of rats exposed to
radio-diapason electromagnetic waves].** [Article in Russian] Belokhvostov AS,
Osipovich VK, Veselova OM, Kolodiazhnaia VA **The elevation of LINE-elements'
DNA level was revealed in blood plasma of rats exposed to electromagnetic
waves.** The amount of full-size 5'-containing LINE-elements copies was
increased **especially. Connection of this effect with retrotransposon
activation and genetic instability condition of organism development is
supposed.**

**  
**Dokl Akad Nauk 1995 Jan;340(1):138-40 **[Induction of virus-like particles
Tu1 by the mini-Tu1 element in the SPT3 mutant strain of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae].** Reznik NL, Zolotova LI, Shuppe NG.

  
Dokl Akad Nauk 1994 Dec;339(6):838-41 **[Extracellular virus-like particles
retrotransposon Gypsy (MDG 4) as an infectivity factor].** Semin BV, Il'in
IuV.

  
Mol Biol (Mosk) 1994 Jul-Aug;28(4):813-21. **[Expression of the third open
reading frame of the drosophila MDG4 retrotransposon similar to the retroviral
env-genes, occurring through splicing].** Avedisov SN, Il'in IuV "The presence
of a third long open reading frame (ORF3) is the common feature of a number of
Drosophila retrotransposons, including MDG4 (gypsy). **Thus, these elements
have a strong structural resemblance to the integrated forms of vertebrate
retroviruses."** "The regulation at the level of splicing is supposed to be
one of the most important factors controlling the transposition frequency of
MDG4."

  
Genetika 1994 Jun;30(6):743-8 **[Introduction of a single transpositionally-
active copy of MDG4 into the genome of a stable line of Drosophila
melanogaster causes genetic instability].** Liubomirskaia NV, Shostak NG,
Kuzin AB, Khudaibergenova BM, Il'in IuV, Kim AI. "A previously described
system of a Drosophila melanogaster mutative strain (MS), which originates
from a stable strain (SS), is characterized by genetic instability caused by
transposition of the retrotransposon gypsy. New unstable strains were obtained
by microinjections of the gypsy transposable copy into SS embryos." "Genetic
instability in the MS system is apparently induced by a combination of two
factors: the presence of a gypsy transposable copy and mutation(s) in the
gene(s) regulating its transpositions."

  
Genetika 1991 Mar;27(3):404-10 **[Maintenance of the copy number of
retrotransposon MDG3 in the Drosophila melanogaster genome].** Glushkova IV,
Beliaeva ESp, Gvozdev VA The genomes of laboratory stocks and natural
population of Drosophila melanogaster contain 8-12 copies of retrotransposon
MDG3 detected by in situ hybridization. Construction of genotypes with
decreased MDG3 copy number using X-chromosome and chromosome 3 free of MDG3
copies **results in appearance of hybrid genomes carrying up to 7-10 copies,
instead of 2-4 copies expected.** New MDG3 copies are detected in different
genome regions, including the 42B hot spot of their location. The chromosomes,
where new clusters of MDG3 were observed, carry conserved "parental pattern"
of MDG1 arrangement. **The data obtained suggest the existence of genomic
mechanism for maintenance of retrotransposon copy number on a definite
level.**

**  
**Biull Eksp Biol Med 1998 Jul;126(7):4-14 **[The role of retroposition in the
self-regulation of genome processes (do genes program the body and retroposons
program genome]?** Bebikhov DV, Postnov AIu, Nikonenko TA.

  
Genetika 1996 Jul;32(7):902-13 **[Analysis of motifs of functional MDG2 sites
in assuring its possible molecular functions].** Ratner VA, Amikishiev VG
"Enhancers of mobile genetic elements are assumed to determine modification of
adjacent genes and polygenes. **Excisions and transpositions of mobile
elements seem to be induced by external stress factors or physiological
factors through a heat-shock system."**

**  
**Genomics 1998 Dec 15;54(3):542-55 **A long terminal repeat of the human
endogenous retrovirus ERV-9 is located in the 5' boundary area of the human
beta-globin locus control region.** Long Q, Bengra C, Li C, Kutlar F, Tuan D.
"Transcription of the human beta-like **globin genes in erythroid cells** is
regulated by the far-upstream locus control region (LCR). In an attempt to
define the 5' border of the LCR, we have cloned and sequenced 5 kb of new
upstream DNA. We found an LTR **retrotransposon belonging to the ERV-9 family
of human endogenous retroviruses** in the apparent 5' boundary area of the
LCR." "This LTR is conserved in human and gorilla, indicating its evolutionary
stability in the genomes of the higher primates. In both recombinant
constructs and the endogenous human genome, the LTR enhancer and promoter
activate the transcription of cis-linked DNA preferentially in erythroid
cells. **Our findings suggest the possibility that this LTR retrotransposon
may serve a relevant host function in regulating the transcription of the
beta-globin** LCR." Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

  
Genetika 1995 Dec;31(12):1605-13 **[Heterologous induction of the
retrotransposon Ty1: reverse transcriptase plays a key role in initiating the
retrotransposition cycle].** Reznik NL, Kidgotko OV, Zolotova LI, Shuppe NG A
new method was developed to study the mechanism of initiation of the
retrotransposition cycle: retrotransposons of Drosophila melanogaster, gypsy,
copia, and 17.6 were expressed in yeast under the control of potent yeast
promoters. **Expression of retrotransposons induced formation of viruslike
particles (VLPs) associated with full-length Ty1 RNA and DNA sequences.** This
phenomenon was termed heterologous induction. **When the gene for reverse
transcriptase of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was expressed in yeast,
the same results were obtained. These data allowed us to assume the excess of
active reverse transcriptase to play the central role in induction of
transposition.** Possible mechanisms of induction of Ty1 transposition by
homologous and heterologous elements are discussed.  
Hum Exp Toxicol 1998 Oct;17(10):560-3 **Effect of retinoid (vitamin A or
retinoic acid) treatment (hormonal imprinting) through breastmilk on the
glucocorticoid receptor and estrogen receptor binding capacity of the adult
rat offspring.** Gaal A, Csaba G. "Hormonal imprinting occurs perinatally when
the developing receptor and the appropriate hormone meet each other. The
presence of related molecules in this critical period causes misimprinting.
Ligands bound **to a member of the steroid-thyroid receptor superfamily can
disturb the normal maturation of other members of the family,** which is
manifested in altered binding capacity of the receptor and decreased or
increased response of the receptor-bearing cell for life. Excess or absence of
the hormone also can cause misimprinting." **"The results of the experiment
call attention to the transmission of imprinter molecules by breastmilk to the
progenies, which can cause lifelong alterations at receptorial level and
points to the human health aspect. Possible reasons for the differences
between retinol and retinoic acid effects and in the sensitivity of receptors
are discussed."**

**  
**Life Sci 1998;63(6):PL 101-5 **Neonatal vitamin E treatment induces long
term glucocorticoid receptor changes: an unusual hormonal imprinting effect.**
Csaba G, Inczefi-Gonda A. "Thousandfold tocopherol did not compete with
labeled dexamethasone for their receptors, suggesting **that neonatal vitamin
E imprinting effect was not done at direct receptorial level."**

**  
**J Hypertens 1998 Jun;16(6):823-8 **Female Wistar-Kyoto and SHR/y rats have
the same genotype but different patterns of expression of renin and
angiotensinogen genes.** Milsted A, Marcelo MC, Turner ME, Ely DL "Female
SHR/y rats have the parental Wistar-Kyoto rat autosomes and X chromosomes and
have no chromosomes of spontaneously hypertensive rat origin; thus they are
genetically equivalent to female Wistar-Kyoto rats." "The combination of
removing estrogen early in development and supplementing the ovariectomized
females with testosterone revealed strain differences in response of blood
pressure." "Differences in regulation of renin-angiotensin system genes
between strains may result from epigenetic mechanisms such as **genome
imprinting** of these genes or of another gene that functions as a common
regulator of renin and angiotensinogen."

  
Gen Pharmacol 1998 May;30(5):685-7 **Imprinting of thymic glucocorticoid
receptor and uterine estrogen receptor by a synthetic steroid hormone at
different times after birth.** Csaba G, Inczefi-Gonda A. 1. "Single
allylestrenol treatment (hormonal imprinting) of 3-day old rats reduced the
density of thymus glucocorticoid receptors and increased the density of uterus
estrogen receptors at adult age." "4. The experiments demonstrate that
hormonal imprinting can be provoked by allylestrenol not only pre- or
neonatally, as was done in previous experiments, but also a few days later.
The imprintability was lost between the 4th and 8th day of life."

  
Gen Pharmacol 1998 May;30(5):647-9 **Fetal digoxin treatment enhances the
binding capacity of thymic glucocorticoid receptors in adult female rats.**
Csaba G, Inczefi-Gonda A. 1. Hormonal imprinting is provoked in the perinatal
critical period in the presence of the appropriate hormone or molecules
similar to it. As a consequence of hormonal imprinting, the developing
receptor finishes its maturation normally (in the presence of the adequate
hormone) or abnormally (under the effect of foreign molecules that are able to
bind to the receptor). 2. Digoxin--which has a steroid character--caused
faulty imprinting by treatments at the 15th, 17th and 20th days of pregnancy.
In the adult (3-month-old) animals, the density of thymic glucocorticoid
receptors was significantly elevated, whereas the density of uterine estrogen
receptors was not, without any change in receptor affinity. 3. The experiments
call attention to the steroid receptor imprinting effect of fetal digoxin
treatment that must be considered in regard to this treatment at this period
and later in regard steroid treatments.

  
Hum Exp Toxicol 1998 Feb;17(2):88-92 **Transgenerational effect of a single
neonatal benzpyrene treatment on the glucocorticoid receptor of the rat
thymus.** Csaba G, Inczefi-Gonda A. Hormonal imprinting is provoked
perinatally by the appropriate **hormone on its receptor,** causing a life-
long adjustment of the connection between the two participants. Faulty
imprinting is caused by the presence of molecules similar to the hormone in
this critical period, which results in a persistent alteration of the
receptor. In the present experiment the transgenerational imprinting effect of
a steroid-like environmental pollutant, benzpyrene, on the receptor binding
capacity of filial thymic dexamethasone and uterine estrogen receptors was
studied. The receptor density (Bmax) of the thymic glucocorticoid receptors of
the males was reduced **up to the third (F2) generation.** In females this
reduction was observed only in the F1 generation of treated animals. There was
no change in receptor affinity (Kd). Uterine estrogen receptors were not
subjected to transgenerational imprinting. The experiments demonstrate (1) the
possibility of the **transgenerational transmission** of imprinting effect,
(2) the differences of steroid receptors in different organs, and (3) the
differences of male's and female's reactions from this aspect. The results
call attention to the dangers of perinatal aromatic hydrocarbon exposition to
the progeny generations.

  
Genetika 1994 Apr;30(4):437-44 [Tv1--a new family of Drosophila virilis
retrotransposons]. Andrianov BV, Shuppe NG. **"The method is based on the
hypothesis about the universal character of retrotransposition through reverse
transcription."**

**  
**Genetika 1990 Mar;26(3):399-411 **[Transpositional bursts and chromosome
rearrangements in unstable lines of Drosophila].** Gerasimova TI,
Ladvishchenko AB, Mogila VA, Georgieva SG, Kiselev SL, Maksymiv DV "The
phenomenon of transpositional bursts--massive simultaneous transpositions of
mobile elements belonging to different structural classes and accompanied by
multiple mutagenesis were earlier described. Although the mechanisms of this
phenomenon are still unclear, it is obvious now that **it embraces total
genome and includes not only transpositions of different mobile elements but
also recombination processes--homologous recombination** for LTR's and gene
conversion."

  
Eksp Onkol 1986;8(2):29-32 **[Nature of the endogenous retrovirus-like
particles of the rat liver].** Korokhov NP, Pyrinova GB, Kurtsman MIa, Tomsons
VP, Salganik RI.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

