![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Intuitive knowledge and its development**  

**Understanding consciousness is necessary for understanding life. Variations
of consciousness, such as dementia, depression, delusion, or insight,
originality, curiosity have to be understood biologically.** ****

To understand our ability to know and discover, I think it's valuable to
consider foolishness along with wisdom, since "knowledge" consists of both.
Scientists have been notorious for opposing new discoveries, but the mental
rigidity of old age is so general, and well known, that many people have
believed that it was caused by the death of brain cells. Individual cells do
tend to become less adaptive with aging, and metabolism generally slows down
with aging, but even relatively young and mentally quick people are
susceptible to losing their ability to understand new ideas.

I think our use of language is both the means by which understanding can be
preserved, encapsulated, and disseminated, and a great impediment to
understanding. At first, words are continuous with the intuitive framework in
which they are learned, but they gradually become relatively independent and
abstract. Things can be learned without directly experiencing them. Even
though words gradually change through use, the simple fact that they have a
degree of dependability allows them to function even when there is no active
thought. Uncritical listening is possible, and if a person can say something,
it seems to be easy to believe that it's true. By the age of 25, our language
has usually given us many assumptions about the nature of the world.

Verbal formulations of one sort are given up for new verbal formulations, in
the process called education. Sometimes graduate students seem to have lost
all common sense. It's as if their hard-drive had been reformatted to allow
their professors to download onto it. But common sense, usually, is just what
Einstein called it, an accumulation of prejudices.

Children learn language so easily that many people have seriously believed
that a certain language was inherited by people of each ethnic group.
Bilingual people were thought to be intellectually inferior (though it turned
out that bilingualism actually increases a person's mental abilities--possibly
because of the brain development known to be produced by learning1.)
Eventually, people learned that the children of immigrants were as capable of
learning the language of the new country as the native children were.

Then, explaining the mystery of language learning took a new form, that didn't
seem foolish to most professional anthropologists and linguists. The first and
most important step in the new theory was to declare that simple learning
theory was inadequate to explain the development of language. Language
developed, just as the silly racial theory had thought, out of our genetic
endowment, except that what we inherited was now said to be a Universal
Language, with its Universal Rules embedded in our chromosomes. Then, the
speed with which children learn language was to be explained as the
"innateness" of all of the complex stuff of language, with only a few things
needing to be actually learned--those minor details that distinguish English
from Eskimo or Zapotec.

Although the phrase "genetic epistemology" was coined by Jean Piaget, a major
philosophical and scientific theme of the 20th century has been the idea that
the "forms" of knowledge, for perceiving space, or logical relations, or
language patterns, are derived from our genes, and that they are somehow built
into the arrangement of our brain cells so that we spontaneously think in
certain ways, and don't have the capacity to transcend the nature of our
inherited brain. In that view, children have their own pre-logical way of
thinking, and their thought (and language development) must proceed through
certain stages, each governed by some "structural" process in the nervous
system. The only thing wrong with the idea of innate knowledge is that people
use it to tell us what we can't know, in other words, to rationalize
stupidity. Of course, they wouldn't like to phrase it that way, because they
consider their "genetic epistemology of symbolic forms" to be the essence and
the totality of intelligence, and that people who allow their thoughts to be
structured entirely by experience are just confused.

Years ago, I had been criticizing Noam Chomsky's theory of language so much,
that I thought I might have misjudged or inappropriately depreciated his
general attitude toward consciousness, so I asked him some questions about the
intelligence of animals. His response confirmed my view that he subscribed to
the most extreme form of "genetic epistemology":

"I don't know whether there is a common animal ability to manipulate images
and generalize. In fact, I doubt it very much. Thus the kind of
"generalization" that leads to knowledge of lanugage from sensory experience
seems to me to involve principles such as those of universal grammar as an
innate property, for reasons I have explained elsewhere, and I see no reason
to believe that these principles underlie generalization in other animals. Nor
do I think that the kinds of generalization that lead a bird to gain knowledge
of how to build a nest, or to sing its song, or to orient itself spatially,
are necessarily part of the human ability to generalize."

All of the textbooks that I have seen that discuss the issue of animal
intelligence have taken a position like that of Chomsky--that any knowledge
animals have is either rigidly instinctual, or else is just a set of movements
that have been mechanically learned. In other words, there isn't anything
intelligent about the complex things that animals may do. Konrad Lorenz and
the ethologists explained animal behavior in terms of chains of reflexes that
are "triggered" by certain sensations or perceptions. This claim that animals'
behavior just consists of mechanical chains of reflexes strictly follows
Descartes' doctrine, and Chomsky has consistently acknowledged that his theory
is Cartesian. The claim that children have their own non-logical way of
understanding things is very similar to the doctrine about animals, in the way
it limits real rational understanding to adult human beings.

The awareness of young animals is particularly impressive to me, because we
know the short time they have had in which to learn about the world. Any
instance in which a young animal understands a completely novel situation, in
a way that is fully adequate and workable, demonstrates that it is capable of
intellectual generalization.

Beyond that, I think animal inventiveness can teach us about our own capacity
for inventiveness, which both the genetic and the behaviorist theories of
knowledge totally fail to explain.

Spiders that build architecturally beautiful webs have been favorite subjects
for theorizing about the instinctive mechanisms of behavior. When spiders were
sent up on an orbiting satellite, they were in a situation that spiders had
never experienced before. Spiders have always taken advantage of gravity for
building their webs, and at first, the orbiting spiders made strange little
muddled arrangements of filaments, but after just a few attempts, they were
able to build exactly the same sort of elegant structures that spiders
normally build. (My interpretation of that was that spiders may be more
intelligent than most neurobiologists.)

Nesting birds often swoop at people or animals who get too close to their
nest. Early last summer, I had noticed some blue jays that seemed to be acting
defensive whenever I went into one part of the yard. On a very hot day at the
end of summer, a couple of plump jays were squawking and apparently trying to
get my attention while I was watering the front yard, and I idly wondered why
they would be acting that way so late in the year. I had gone around the house
to water things in the back yard, and the birds came over the house, and were
still squawking, and trying to get my attention. I realized that their
excitement didn't have anything to do with their nest, and looking more
carefully, I saw that they were young birds. As it dawned on me that they were
interested in the water squirting out of the hose, I aimed the stream up
towards them, and they got as close to it as they could. Since the force of
the stream might have hurt them, I put on a nozzle that made a finer spray,
and the birds immediately came down to the lowest tip of the branch, where
they could get the full force of the mist, holding out their wings, and
leaning into the spray so that it ruffled their breast feathers. Their
persistence had finally paid off when they got me to understand what they
wanted, and they were enjoying the cool water. As new young birds, I don't
know how they understood hoses and squirting water, but it was clear that they
recognized me as a potentially intelligent being with whom they could
communicate.

For a person, that wouldn't have seemed like a tremendously inventive response
to the hot weather, but for young birds that hadn't been out of the nest for
long, it made it clear to me that there is more inventive intelligence in the
world than is apparent to most academic psychologists and ethologists.

Early porpoise researchers were surprised when a porpoise understood a
sequence in which one tone was followed by two, and then by three, and
answered by producing a series of four tones. The porpoise had discovered that
people knew how to count.

Experiments with bees show the same sort of understanding of numbers and
intentions. An experimenter set out dishes of honey in a sequence, doubling
the distance each time. After the first three dishes had been found by scouts,
the bees showed up at the fourth location before the honey arrived,
extrapolating from the experimenter's previous behavior and inferring his
intentions.

Once I noticed that an ant seemed to be dozing at the base of every maple
leaf, and that there were several aphids on each leaf. I was getting very
close, trying to understand why the ant was sitting so quietly. Apparently my
odor gave the ant a start, and he leaped into activity, racing up the leaf,
and giving each aphid a tap as he passed. When he had reached the end of the
leaf and had touched every aphid, his agitation suddenly disappeared, and he
returned to his spot at the base of the leaf. Although I knew that ants could
count very well, as demonstrated by experiments in which an ant had to
describe a complex route to a dish of honey, it was the apparent emotion that
interested me. It reminded me of the hostess who counted her dishes before the
guests left.

When the brains of such different kinds of animal work in such similar ways,
in situations that contain many new components, I don't think it's possible to
conclude anything except that intelligence is a common property of animals,
and that it comprises "generalization" and much more. It's obvious that they
grasp the situation in a realistic way. The situation has structured their
awareness. Some people might say that they have "modeled the situation in
their mind," but it's enough to say that they understand what's going on. With
that understanding, motivations and intentions form part of the perception,
since the situation is a developing process. Ordinarily, we say that we
"infer" motivations and intentions and "deduce" probable outcomes, but that
implies that the situation is static, rather than continuous with its origin
and outcome. In reality, these understandings and expectations are part of the
direct perception. It isn't a matter of "intelligence" operating upon
"sensations," but of intelligence inhering in the grasping of the situation.
(In Latin, **_intelligo_** meant "I perceive." I suspect that a Roman might
have perceived the word **_intelligens_** as being derived from roots such as
**_tele_** \--from Greek, or **tela,** web, warp thread--and **_ligo or
lego_** , connoting the binding in or gathering of what is distant or
extended.)

This view of a generalized animal intelligence wouldn't seem strange, except
that the history of official western philosophy, the doctrine of genetic
determinism in biology, and the habits that form with the rigid uses of
language, have offered another way of looking at it. The simple intelligence
of an animal would disrupt all of that important stuff, so it has become
mandatory to dismiss all examples of intelligent behavior by animals as "mere
anthropomorphizing." Sadly, this has also meant that most intelligent behavior
by humans has also been dismissed.

The cellular development of an organism used to be described as a process in
which everything is predetermined by the genes, but the interactions between
an embryo and its environment are now known to be crucial in shaping the
process of maturation, so that the real organism (the phenotype) doesn't
necessarily reflect its genetic make-up (genotype); the term "phenocopy"
acknowledges this process.

London taxi drivers were recently found to have an enlargement of part of the
hippocampus, compared to the brains of other people, and the difference was
greater, in proportion to the time they had been driving taxis. Their brains
have been shaped by their activities.

If the brain's cellular anatomy is so radically affected by activity even in
adulthood, then the concept of awareness as a process in which consciousness
takes its form from the situation shouldn't be problematic. If a bee and a
porpoise can draw similar conclusions from similar experiences, then the world
is being grasped by both in an objective way.

The environment shapes the organism's response, and the momentary response
contributes to the development of the supporting processes and apparatuses. So
the ability to respond is the basic question. If the richly grasped situation
contains its own implications, there is no need for explaining the ability to
perceive those implications in terms of some prearranged neurological code,
except for the ability to respond complexly and appropriately. Any specific
interpretation or behavior which is predetermined is going to function as an
impediment to understanding. Verbal formulations often have the function of
creating a stereotyped and inappropriate response.

The "genetic epistemologists" confuse their own verbal interpretations with
the real ways that understanding develops, and when a child doesn't yet know
all of the connotations of a specific word, the psychologist ascribes a pre-
logical brain function to the child.3 The similar failure to perceive and to
communicate accounts for the foolish things ethologists have said about animal
intelligence.

The process in which an organism responds to a situation is continuous with
the process of communication. The organism understands that in certain
situations a response can be elicited, and so it acts accordingly.

Communication is a response that is directed toward eliciting a response from
another. The idea that an animal might have an intention, or a desire to
communicate or respond, has been obsessively denied by most official western
philosophers, who see that as a uniquely human quality, but some philosophers
have even denied that quality to humans. For them, consciousness is a passive
receptacle for units of meaning and logic, like a mail bin at the post-office,
where letters are received, sorted, and distributed. Maybe computers work that
way, but there is nothing in living substance that works like that.

Consciousness is participation, in the sense that there is a response of an
organism to events. Even dreams and hallucinations have their implied
reference to something real.

If a violin has been soaked in water, it will sound very odd when it's played.
Its various parts won't resonate properly. Similarly, the living substance has
to be in a particular state to resonate properly with its environment.

People have proposed that visual experience involves the luminescence of
nerves in the optical system. Presumably, similar analogs of events could
occur in various tissues when we are conscious of sounds, tastes, smells, etc.
But whether or not our auditory nerves are singing when we experience music,
no one questions the existence of some sort of responsive activity when we are
being conscious of something. Activating certain brain areas will make us
conscious of certain things, and that activation can be a response to sensory
nerve impulses, or to brain chemicals produced in dreaming or drug-induced
hallucinations, or to electrical stimulation, or to the act of remembering.

The history of the prefrontal leukotomy or lobotomy, in which undesirable
behaviors were surgically removed, was closely associated with the development
of surgical treatments for epilepsy.

Natalya Bekhtereva was exploring alternative treatments for epilepsy,
implanting fine wire electrodes into the abnormal parts of the brain, and
surrounding areas, to discover the nature of the electrical events that were
associated with the seizures. In the process, she discovered that meanings and
intentions corresponded to particular electrical patterns. She found that
giving certain kinds of stimulation to healthy parts of the brain could
stimulate the development of ways of functioning that by-passed the seizure-
prone parts of the brain. Extending this, seeing that creating new patterns of
nervous activity could overcome sickness, she proposed that creativity, the
activation of the brain in new ways, would itself be therapeutic. Some people,
such as Stanislav Grof, advocated the therapeutic use of LSD with a rationale
that seems similar, for example to overcome chronic pain by changing its
meaning, putting it into a different relation to the rest of experience. "In
general, psychedelic therapy seems to be most effective in the treatment of
alcoholics, narcotic-drug addicts, depressed patients, and individuals dying
of cancer." 2 Since LSD shifts the balance away from serotonin dominance
toward dopamine dominance, its effect can be to erase the habits of learned
helplessness. Stress and pain also leave their residue in the endorphin
system, and the anti-opiates such as naloxone can relieve depression, improve
memory, and restore disturbed pituitary functions, for example leading to the
restoration of menstrual rhythms interrupted by stress or aging. The amazing
speed with which young animals can solve problems is undoubtedly a reflection
of their metabolic vigor, and it is probably partly because they haven't yet
experienced the paralysis that can result from repeated or prolonged and
inescapable stress. Many of the factors responsible for the metabolic
intensity of youth can be used therapeutically, even after dullness has
developed. The right balance of amino acids and carbohydrates, and the
avoidance of the antimetabolic unsaturated fatty acids, can make a great
difference in mental functioning, even though we still don't know what the
ideal formulas are.

While chemical -- nutritional -- hormonal approaches can help to restore
creativity, the work of people like Bekhtereva shows that the exercise of
creativity can help to restore biochemical and physiological systems to more
normal functioning. Learning new general principles or new languages can be
creatively restorative.  

NOTES AND REFERENCES

1\. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 Apr 11;97(8):4398-403. Navigation-related
structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers. Maguire EA, Gadian DG,
Johnsrude IS, Good CD, Ashburner J, Frackowiak RS, Frith CD. Structural MRIs
of the brains of humans with extensive navigation experience, licensed London
taxi drivers, were analyzed and compared with those of control subjects who
did not drive taxis. The posterior hippocampi of taxi drivers were
significantly larger relative to those of control subjects. A more anterior
hippocampal region was larger in control subjects than in taxi drivers.
Hippocampal volume correlated with the amount of time spent as a taxi driver
(positively in the posterior and negatively in the anterior hippocampus).
These data are in accordance with the idea that the posterior hippocampus
stores a spatial representation of the environment and can expand regionally
to accommodate elaboration of this representation in people with a high
dependence on navigational skills. It seems that there is a capacity for local
plastic change in the structure of the healthy adult human brain in response
to environmental demands.  

2\. ("History of LSD Therapy," Stanislav Grof, M.D. Chapter 1 of LSD
Psychotherapy, ©1980, 1994 by Stanislav Grof. Hunter House Publishers,
Alameda, California, ISBN 0-89793-158-0).

3\. There is an example of this argument about the nature of reasoning in New
Scientist magazine, December 9, 2000. P. Johnson-Laird found that more than
99% of Princeton University students were unable to solve a logical puzzle
correctly. Ira Noveck of the Claude Bernard University in Lyon believes this
may result simply from people's difficulty interpreting the language of the
puzzles.  

Fiziol Cheloveka 2000 Mar-Apr;26(2):5-9 [The cerebral organization of
creativity. I. The development of a psychological test]. Starchenko MG,
Vorob'ev VA, Kliucharev VA, Bekhtereva NP, Medevedev SV.  

Fiziol Cheloveka 1998 Jul-Aug;24(4):55-63 [Brain processing of visually
presented verbal stimuli at different levels of their integration. II. The
orthographic and syntactic aspects]. Vorob'ev VA, Korotkov AD, Pakhomov SV,
Rozhdestvenskii DG, Rudas MS, Bekhtereva NP, Medvedev SV.  

Neurosci Behav Physiol 1986 Jul-Aug; 16(4):333-9 The systemic approach to the
stability and plasticity of neurophysiological processes during adaptive brain
activity. Vasilevskii VN The problem of the stability and adaptability of
regulatory processes is considered, taking as a point of departure N. P.
Bekhtereva's theory regarding stable pathological states, and inflexible and
adaptable links in control systems. The need to introduce a probabilistic
approach is emphasized. Generalizations are made on materials relating to the
connectability of the separate components of the biorhythms of functional
systems, and to the stability of their amplitude-frequency characteristics.
The corpus of facts permitted the successful development in clinical practice
of functional biocontrol and feedback.  

Neurosci Behav Physiol 1986 Jul-Aug; 16(4):322-33. A study of the
connectedness among distant neuronal populations in the human brain during
mental activity. Bekhtereva NP, Medvedev SV, Krol EM In this article, we
present the results of a study of connectedness among distant neuronal
populations in human deep-brain structures. The time characteristics involved
and the stability of the connections between different neuronal populations
during monotonous mental activity are discussed. We show that a stable
connectedness does correlate with mental activity; however, the connections
themselves do not correlate with one another. We also show that the individual
connections, the elements of the system which make mental activity possible,
can function with various degrees of rigidity or flexibility.  

Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 1986;289(5):1276-80 [Physiologic role of changes in the
human neuron discharge rate during a single mental act]. Bekhtereva NP,
Gogolitsyn IuL, Pakhomov SV.  

Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 1985;285(5):1233-5 [Neurons-detectors of errors in
subcortical structures of human brain]. Bekhtereva NP, Kropotov IuD, Ponomarev
VA.  

Neurosci Behav Physiol 1985 Jan-Feb;15(1):27-32 Bioelectrical correlates of
protective mechanisms of the brain. Bekhtereva NP.  

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova 1984 Aug;70(8):1092-9 [Neurochemical aspects
of therapeutic electric stimulation]. Bekhtereva NP, Dambinova SA, Gurchin FA,
Smirnov VM, Korol'kov AV. Comparative analysis of the CSF and blood protein-
peptide composition in Parkinsonian patients performed with the aid of
indwelled electrodes prior to and after therapeutic electrical stimulation
(TES) of the brain subcortical structures, revealed a therapeutic effect in
the form of reduced muscular rigidity and a mental activation with a positive
emotional response. After the TES the protein content in the biological fluids
tended to become normalized and the the range of low-molecular protein-peptide
fractions changed. A high-performance liquid chromatography, bidimensional
electrophoresis and thin-layer chromatography revealed about 5-6 factors of
peptide nature with the molecular mass less than 5000 daltons in the CSF and
blood after the TES. These factors were shown to exert a biological effect
upon muscle preparation of the leech.  

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova 1984 Jul;70(7):892-903 [Relationships of
distantly located neuronal populations in the human brain in the realization
of the thinking process]. Bekhtereva NP, Medvedev SV, Krol' EM The time
characteristics of the interneuronal connections as well as interrelationships
among distant neuronal populations of the human brain deep structures were
studied during monotonous mental activity. It was shown that stable
interrelationships could be considered as a correlate of mental activity
though the connections themselves were not of the correlative nature. These
connections, being the elements of the activity--maintaining system, could be
of various degree of rigidity.  

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova 1984 Jul;70(7):881-91 [Reflection of the
semantic characteristics of the thinking process in the impulse activity of
neurons]. Bekhtereva NP The paper deals with the progress in research into the
problem of reflection of semantic characteristics of psychological tests in
impulse activity of neurons and neuronal assemblies. The high dynamicity of
brain correlates of thinking in most brain zones is stressed. Advantages and
limits of different technical approaches as well as the most urgent tasks to
be solved are discussed.  

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova 1984 Jul;70(7):1071-5 [Natal'ia Petrovna
Bekhtereva]. Iliukhina VA Biography  

Hum Physiol 1982 Sep-Oct;8(5):303-16 Cerebral organization of emotional
reactions and states. Bekhtereva NP, Kambarova DK, Ivanov GG  

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1980;80(8):1127-33 [Bioelectric
correlates of the brain's protective mechanisms]. Bekhtereva NP The author
substantiates the necessity of searching for new means producing a therapeutic
effect on the brain of epileptic patients that would be similar, in principle,
to the brain's own protective mechanisms. This can be done, in the author's
opinion, on the basis of studying the most probable bioelectric equivalents of
the protective mechanisms. The author suggests a new method for suppressing
the epileptogenic focus. This suppression, close to the physiological one, is
effected by applying a weak sinusoidal current to the focus via
intracerebrally implanted electrodes. Data on the suppression of the
epileptiform activity within the zone of the current application, as well as
data confirming the local character of the current action are presented. The
place of the new method in the system of complex therapy, particularly of
epilepsy, is determined with consideration of the role of the stable
pathological state. Probable neurophysiological mechanisms of the sinusoidal
current action on the epileptogenic focus are discussed.  

Vestn Akad Med Nauk SSSR 1979;(7):30-7 [Potentials of neurophysiology in the
study of a resistant pathological state]. Bekhtereva NP  

Act Nerv Super (Praha) 1976;18(3):157-67 The neurophysiological code of
simplest mental processes in man. Bekhtereva NP  

Vestn Akad Med Nauk SSSR 1975;(8):8-19 [Cerebral organization of human
emotions]. Bekhtereva NP, Smirnov VM  

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova 1973 Dec;59(12):1785-802 [Principles of the
organization of the structure of the space-time code of short-term verbal
memory]. Bekhtereva NP, Bundzen PV, Kaidel VD, David EE.

Vopr Neirokhir 1972 Jan-Feb;36(1):7-12 [Therapeutic electric stimulation of
deep brain structures]. Bekhtereva NP, Bondarchuk AN, Smirnov VM, Meliucheva
LA  

Vestn Akad Med Nauk SSSR 1972;27(9):43-9 [Principles of functional
organization of the human brain]. [Article in Russian] Bekhtereva NP.  

Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova 1971 Dec;57(12):1745-61 [Functional
reorganization of the activity of human brain neuron populations during short-
term verbal memory]. Bekhtereva NP, Bundzen PV, Matveev IuK, Kaplunovskii AS  

From a biography by the Archives Jean Piaget: "His researches in developmental
psychology and genetic epistemology had one unique goal: how does knowledge
grow? His answer is that the growth of knowledge is a progressive construction
of logically embedded structures superseding one another by a process of
inclusion of lower less powerful logical means into higher and more powerful
ones up to adulthood. Therefore, children's logic and modes of thinking are
initially entirely different from those of adults."

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

