![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Leakiness, aging, and cancer**  
  
A thin layer of fibrin lining blood vessels provides a filtering barrier that
helps to strengthen the wall and prevent other proteins from leaking out of
the vessels, and it participates in repair processes when the blood vessel is
broken.

Cellular energy metabolism is the basis for maintaining the barrier functions.
Energy depletion causes the endothelial cells lining blood vessels to become
excessively permeable.

When the organism's resistance is low, proteins and fats that normally remain
inside the bloodstream can escape into the extracellular matrix and enter
cells, contributing to their stress and disorganization, and other materials
can escape from cells and enter the bloodstream.

One of the simplest demonstrations of fibrin leakage is to shine a beam of
light into the eye; the presence of fibrin and other inappropriate molecules
diffuses the light, causing a "flare" in the aqueous compartment. Albumin, a
small protein from the blood, is often seen in the urine during stress. The
effects of that sort of leakage vary with each organ.

Fibrin is an essential structural and functional part of the organism, but
when it escapes from the bloodstream it participates in the degenerative
processes of inflammation, fibrosis, and tumor formation. (Its fragments
stimulate secretion of inflammatory mediators: Hamaguchi et al., 1991.)

In the hormonal environment dominated by estrogen, mild stresses such as
exertion, or even restless sleep, allow toxins (and sometimes bacteria) from
the intestine to enter the bloodstream, triggering a complex chain of events
that create a systemic inflammatory state. Although these processes have been
observed in many simple experiments, their implications are almost always
neglected or denied or explained away. Incorporation of certain
polyunsaturated fats into the tissues increases the leakiness of blood
vessels, and amplifies the reactions to stresses and inflammatory stimuli.

Antioxidants, thyroid hormone, progesterone, and antiinflammatory agents,
including glycine or gelatin, niacin, and saturated fats, can prevent, and in
many cases reverse, these degenerative inflammatory processes.

Even a single celled organism has to keep its parts separate, and highly
differentiated multicelled organisms have many special systems that serve to
keep their parts separate, so the different tissues and organs can maintain
their distinct functions.

The movement of substances from blood to cell, and from cell to cell, is
normally very tightly controlled, and when the systems that control those
movements of water and its solutes are damaged, the tissues' structures and
functions are altered. The prevention of inappropriate leakiness can protect
against the degenerative processes, and against aging itself, which is, among
other things, a state of generalized leakiness.

When cells' energy is depleted, water and various dissolved molecules are
allowed to move into the cells, out of the cells, and through or around cells
inappropriately. The weakened cells can even permit whole bacteria and similar
particles to pass into and out of the blood stream more easily.

One of the earliest investigators of the effects of stress and fatigue on
nerves and other cells was A.P. Nasonov, in the first half of the 20th
century. A.S. Troshin (1956) has reviewed his work in detail. He showed that
in cells as different as algae and nerve cells, fatigue caused them to take up
dyes, and that the dyes were extruded, if the cells were able to recover their
energy. When nerve cells are excited for a fraction of a second, they take up
sodium and calcium, but quickly eliminate them. Prolonged excitation, leading
to fatigue, can gradually shift the balance, allowing more substances to
enter, and to stay longer.

When nerves or other cells are quickly killed with heavy metals such as
osmium, the metals are visible in a layer at the surface, which is sometimes
taken as evidence of a "cytoplasmic membrane," but if the cells have suffered
oxygen deprivation or have been injured by X-rays, the metal will be visible
as a grey color evenly distributed through the cell. The deposition of the
metal occurs when it reacts with electrons. In the relatively vital cell, the
heavy metal stops at the surface, and is mostly reduced there, but the
devitalized cell presents no structural or chemical barrier to the entry of
the metal, and the reactive electrons appear to be evenly distributed through
the cell. Oxygen deprivation, X-irradiation, and other stresses cause the cell
to be unable to use electrons to produce energy, and instead the electrons are
available to react destructively with whatever may be available. While Nasonov
showed that dyes and even particles enter energetically depleted cells, newer
techniques are able to show that the leaky cells are structurally disrupted by
the excessive reduction of their proteins, by excited electrons and free
radicals.

In the 1970s, experimenters found that muscles from vitamin E deficient
animals released their enzymes when washed in a saline solution, more easily
than did the muscles from vitamin E replete animals. Other experiments around
the same time showed that reducing the ATP of muscles caused a similar loss of
their ability to retain their proteins.

Over the years, many experiments have established, both in vitro and in vivo,
that fatigue, stress, aging, and inflammation cause cells to lose their normal
constituents, but also to allow foreign materials to enter more easily.

When I was working on my thesis, around 1970, investigating the effects of
aging on the metabolism of the uterus, I found that the changes occuring
during aging were (in all the ways I tested) the same as those produced by
X-irradiation, excess estrogen, oxygen deprivation, excess polyunsaturated
fats, and vitamin E deficiency.

Although everyone working in the lab was familiar with the appearance of the
uterus from old hamsters (they are typically large, stiff, and bluish),
everyone was surprised when I suggested that the aged uteri seemed to function
as if they were under the influence of a considerable amount of estrogen.
Everyone was familiar with the medical textbook doctrine that "menopause is
caused by estrogen deficiency." In humans, gynecologists know about
"Chadwick's sign," the fact that the uterine cervix turns blue or purple
during pregnancy, and everyone knows that blood is blue when it's deprived of
oxygen, so it's surprising that estrogen's effect on tissue oxygenation isn't
widely recognized.

When estrogen is given to an animal, it almost instantly causes capillaries to
become leaky, allowing water to move out of the blood stream, and at the same
time, estrogen causes cells to take up water. Both of these processes are the
same as the early effects of oxygen deprivation. In the normal reproductive
cycle, the surge of estrogen lasts only a few hours, and normal permeability
is quickly restored by increasing progesterone. During those intermittent
short exposures to estrogen, there isn't a massive leakage of serum proteins
into the tissues. During the time of estrogenic influence, all kinds of cells
are influenced, with the excitatory equilibrium of nerve cells, glandular
cells, and immune system cells being shifted, lowering the threshold of
excitation, or prolonging the excited state.

Anything that causes inflammation causes a similar loss of water from the
blood, as it is taken up by swelling cells. If inflammation is generalized, it
causes circulatory shock, because the volume of the blood has become
insufficient to serve the organism's needs. One of Hans Selye's earliest
observations of the effect of an overdose of estrogen was that it causes
shock.

Although water loss causes the blood to become more viscous under the
influence of estrogen, the plasma becomes hypotonic, meaning that it contains
fewer osmotically active solutes than normal; some of the sodium that helps to
maintain the blood's osmotic balance is lost through the kidneys, and some is
taken up by the red blood cells and other cells. The osmotic imbalance of the
blood causes tissue cells to take up more water, contributing to their
increased excitability. In many cases, the vascular leakage of inflammation
and shock can be corrected by using osmotically active substances, such as
starch solutions, gelatin, or concentrated sodium chloride.

The tissue water retention caused by estrogen, hypoxia, and stress is
analogous to the swelling of gels and colloids, that is, it's governed by the
state of the electrons and counterions in the system. Excitation, fatigue, or
injury can cause a shift of pH toward alkalinity, causing water uptake and
swelling.

The blue color of the pregnant cervix, or of the uterus in an animal given an
overdose of estrogen, indicates that the tissue isn't sufficiently oxygenated
to maintain its normal red color, even though the flow of blood is increased.
Some experimenters have noticed that newborn animals sometimes have the
postural reflex (lordosis) that indicates an estrogenic state, and that
suffocation can produce the same reflex. Irradiating animals with x-rays will
also produce the whole range of estrogenic effects.

One of the features of the aged uterus that I studied was the age pigment,
lipofuscin, a brown waxy material that accumulates in old or stressed tissues.
Prolonged dosage with estrogen accelerates the formation of this pigment,
which is largely derived from oxidized polyunsaturated fatty acids. Increased
amounts of those fats in the diet, or a deficiency of vitamin E, or exposure
to ionizing radiation, or oxygen deprivation, can also accelerate the
formation of the age pigment. The presence of the pigment intensifies the
effect of estrogen, since the pigment wastes oxygen by functioning as an
oxidase enzyme.

Other tests that I did on aged, or estrogenized, uterine tissue indicated that
several oxidative systems were activated; for example, the tissues showed an
extremely high activity of the enzyme peroxidase, and a very intense reduction
of a chemical dye (tetrazolium/formazan) that indicates the presence of
reductive and oxidative activity, of the sorts caused by radiation and oxygen
deprivation. These reductive and oxidative processes include the production of
some free radicals that are capable of reacting randomly with polyunsaturated
fatty acids.

The interactions between estrogen and the polyunsaturated fats are now coming
to be more widely recognized as important factors in the
inflammatory/hyperpermeable conditions that contribute to the development of
heart and blood vessel disease, hypertension, cancer, autoimmune diseases,
dementia, and other less common degenerative conditions.

Estrogen increases lipid peroxidation, and maintains a chronically high
circulating level of free fatty acids, mainly PUFA, activates the
phospholipases that release arachidonic acid from cells leading to formation
of prostaglandins and isoprostanes, and increases the enzymes that form the
inflammation-promoting platelet activating factor (PAF) while suppressing the
enzymes that destroy it, and increases a broad range of other inflammatory
mediators, interleukins, and NF-kappa B.

The leakage of enzymes out of cells and into the blood stream is recognized
medically as evidence of damage to the organ that is losing them. Different
combinations of enzymes are commonly considered to be evidence of a heart
attack, or skeletal muscle damage, or liver disease, pancreatitis, prostate
cancer, etc. But often the reason for the leakage isn't understood.
Hypothyroidism, for example, causes leakage of enzymes, possibly mainly from
the liver, but also from other organs. Excess estrogen, intense exercise,
starvation, anything that increases lipid peroxidation and free radical
production, such as drinking alcohol when the tissues contain polyunsaturated
fats, can cause organs such as heart and liver to leak their components.

The loss of enzymes increases the energy needed to stay alive, but it doesn't
necessarily change the basic functions of the cell. (Though when mitochondrial
enzymes leak out into the cytoplasm, the cell's energy metabolism is impaired,
at least temporarily.) But the entry of catalytic materials from other tissues
changes the organization of a cell, giving it conflicting instructions. In
many situations, as L.V. Polezhaev and V. Filatov demonstrated, the substances
released during stress and degeneration serve to stimulate healing and
regeneration. But when the resources aren't available for full repair or
regeneration, only a scar, or atrophic fibrosis, or a tumor will be formed.

In severe stress, intracellular fibrin deposits have been found in the heart
and other organs, including the prostate gland. Deficiency of testosterone
causes vascular leakage into the prostate. Fibrin promotes tumor growth,
partly by serving as a matrix, partly by releasing stimulatory peptides.

Kidney disease, diabetes, pregnancy toxemia and retinal degeneration are
probably the best known problems involving vascular leakage, but increasingly,
cancer and heart disease are being recognized as consequences of prolonged
permeability defects. Congestive heart failure and pulmonary hypertension
commonly cause leakage of fluid into the lungs, and shock of any sort causes
the lung to get "wet," a waterlogged condition called "shock lung." Simply
hyperventilating for a couple of minutes will increase leakage from the blood
into the lungs; hyperventilation decreases carbon dioxide, and increases
serotonin and histamine. Hyperoxia itself contributes to lung injury, and
exacerbates emphysema, though it is common to see patients breathing a high
concentration of oxygen. Emphysema (which can be caused by hypothyroidism or
hyper-estrogenism, and often can be cured by thyroid or progesterone) and many
other respiratory problems are associated with capillary leakage. Cells of the
lung and intestine are able to synthesize their own fibrin, apparently because
of their special problems in preventing leakage. Prolonged systemic
inflammation can lead to lung fibrosis, and fibrosis increases the likelihood
of lung cancer.

The inflammatory state that causes exaggerated cellular permeability is very
closely related to "hyperventilation," the loss of too much carbon dioxide.
The release of serotonin during hyperventilation isn't the only cause of
vascular leakage; the carbon dioxide itself is an essential factor in
regulating the state of cellular electrons and in maintaining cellular
integrity. Hyperventilation, like the shift from oxidative to glycolytic
energy production that typifies estrogenized or stressed cells or cancer,
raises intracellular pH. In the case of mast cells, increasing alkalinity
causes them to release histamine (Alfonso, et al., 2005), but similar
"alkaline-induced exocytosis" seems to occur in all stressed tissues.

The blood platelets that become incontinent and leak serotonin in the absence
of carbon dioxide are undergoing the same structural stresses experience by
endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, mast cells and all other cells when
carbon dioxide is depleted. Although it has been about 70 years since Yandell
Henderson made it clear that supplemental oxygen should be combined with
carbon dioxide, mechanical ventilation in hospitals is still causing lung
injury resulting from hyperventilation, i.e., the absence of carbon dioxide. A
similar misunderstanding of biology was involved in the use of dialysis to
treat kidney disease. Until recently, commercial dialysis fluids contained
acetate and/or racemic lactate instead of bicarbonate, because of the
difficulty of preparing bicarbonate solutions, and the result was that very
prolonged dialysis would damage the brain and other organs. (Veech and
Gitomer, 1988, Veech and Fowler, 1987.) Dialysis has been seen to increase
lung permeability Bell, et al., 1988).

Amyloidosis produced by chronic dialysis affects all organs, but its effects
are best known in the brain, heart, kidneys, and lungs. Serum amyloid-A is one
of the acute phase proteins, like C-reactive protein (CRP), that are produced
by inflammation. Estrogen, radiation and other stresses increase those pro-
inflammatory acute phase proteins, and decrease protective albumin, which is
called a "negative acute phase protein," since it decreases when the other
acute phase proteins increase. The liver is the major source of the acute
phase proteins, and it is constantly burdened by toxins absorbed from the
bowel; disinfection of the bowel is known to accelerate recovery from stress.

Seen from the perspective of the stress-leakage syndrome, any serious injury
or sickness damages all organs. The exhaled breath is being used to diagnose
inflammatory lung disease, since so many of the mediators of inflammation are
volatile, but systemic diseases such as cancer and arthritis, and relatively
minor stress can be detected by changes in the chemicals found in the breath.
Polyunsaturated fats and their breakdown products--aldehydes, prostaglandins,
isoprostanes, hydrocarbons, and free radicals--and carbon monoxide, nitric
oxide, nitrite, and hydrogen peroxide are increased in the breath by most
stresses. Both proline and glycine (which are major amino acids in gelatin)
are very protective for the liver, increasing albumin, and stopping oxidative
damage.

Saturated fats are protective against free radical damage and can reverse
liver fibrosis. Thyroid hormone protects against excess estrogen, and can
prevent or reverse fibrosis of the heart. Antiestrogens are widely effective
against vascular leakage. Thyroid, progesterone, and testosterone are among
the most effective natural antiestrogens, and they are curative in many
conditions that involve vascular leakage. Progesterone and pregnenolone have
been called the antifibromatic steroids, and it has been used to treat many
inflammatory and fibrotic diseases, including cancer.

The antiserotonin drugs are being increasingly used to treat fibrotic
diseases, and other problems related to vascular leakage.

Antiinflammatory and anticoagulant things, especially aspirin and vitamin E,
protect against the accelerated turnover of fibrinogen/fibrin caused by
estrogen and the various inflammatory states.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

