A R T I C L E BSE - mad cow - scrapie, etc.: Stimulated amyloid degeneration
and the toxic fats I have written before about the protective effects of
carbon dioxide and progesterone, especially for the brain, and how the
structure of cell water is affected by adsorbed and dissolved materials, and
by metabolic energy. In the high energy (rested) state, cell water behaves as
if it were colder than its real temperature, and this affects the behavior of
proteins and fats in the cell, allowing “oily” surfaces to remain in contact
with the more orderly water. Carbon dioxide spontaneously combines with the
amino groups in proteins, stabilizing the normal functional conformation. The
loss of carbon dioxide affects the structure of all proteins in the body, and
the loss of cellular energy affects the structure of the intracellular
proteins and their associated molecules. In scrapie and many other
degenerative diseases (the amyloidoses), proteins condense into fibrils that
tend to keep enlarging, with a variety of very harmful effects. The
condensation of the “amyloid” proteins is sensitive to temperature, and a
slight increase in the disorder of the water can induce functional proteins to
change their conformation so that they spontaneously associate into fibrous
masses. In the absence of sufficient carbon dioxide, all proteins are
susceptible to structural alteration by the addition of sugars and fats and
aldehydes, especially under conditions that favor lipid peroxidation. The
amyloidoses affect different tissues in different ways, but when they occur in
the brain, they produce progressive loss of function, with the type of protein
forming the fibrils determining the nature of the functional loss. The protein
which carries thyroid hormone and vitamin A, transthyretin, can produce nerve
and brain amyloid disease, but it can also protect against other amyloid brain
diseases; in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease,
and the “prion diseases” (scrapie, kuru, CJD, BSE, etc.) amyloid particles are
formed by different proteins. The transthyretin protein which is binding small
molecules resists condensation into the amyloid fibrils, but without its
normal vitamin A and thyroid hormone, it can create toxic fibrils. (Raghu, et
al., 2002.) Around 1970 I read E. J. Field’s suggestion that aging tissues and
tissues affected by viral diseases showed some similar structures (“inclusion
bodies”) under the electron microscope. In following up those observations, it
turned out that old tissues appeared to develop antigens “identical with, or
similar to,” scrapie-infected young tissues. The premature aging caused by
removal of the thymus gland in newborn animals produced similar results.
Field’s group and others (e.g., Alpers) were clearly showing that the scrapie
infection involved proteins, but not viruses with nucleic acids. In one of
Field’s last publications (1978), he even suggested that the infectious
process might depend on a structural rearrangement of the host’s molecules,
similar to the idea which is now known as the “prion hypothesis.” Field’s
suggestion was an important advance in the theory of aging, and the evidence
supporting it is now voluminous, but that work has been omitted from the
official histories. Although phenomena of “imprinting” and non-genetic
inheritance had been established earlier, the dogmatism of genetics led the
scientific establishment to reject everything that challenged the primacy of
DNA. When I mentioned to my professors (in 1971) the evidence that scrapie was
transmitted without nucleic acid, I could see from their reactions that it
would be a very long time before much progress would be made in understanding
the degenerative brain diseases. When the exact structure of the “infectious”
protein was later worked out, and the 1997 Nobel Prize awarded (to Stanley
Prusiner), I was surprised that no one from Field’s group was included. (In
1976, a nobel prize had been awarded to D.C. Gajdusek, for his promotion of
the idea of “slow viruses” in general, and particularly for arguing that
scrapie, CJD and kuru were caused by slow viruses.) In reading Prusiner’s
autobiographical statements, I was even more surprised to see that he claimed
to have been puzzled to find out, around 1983, that the infectious agent was a
protein. I had thought that my professors were lethargic authoritarians when
they refused to look at the evidence in 1970-72, but Prusiner’s expression of
puzzlement so many years later over the absence of nucleic acid in the
infectious agent is hard to account for. In my own research in 1971, I was
interested in another kind of age-related “inclusion body,” which was
variously called lipofuscin, age pigment, and ceroid pigment. This brown
(yellow autofluorescent) pigment contained proteins and metals, as well as
polyunsaturated lipids, and overlapped in many ways with the amyloid bodies.
All of these inclusion bodies were known to be associated with radiation
injury, aging, and hormonal-nutritional imbalances. Excess of estrogen,
polyunsaturated fatty acids, and oxidative metals were major factors in the
development of lipofuscin, and estrogen was also known to cause other types of
“inclusion bodies” to develop in cells. Although very little was known about
the composition of the inclusion bodies (they were usually thought to be
organelles damaged by free radical activity, or antibodies resulting from
autoimmunity), their involvement in aging and degenerative disease was clear,
and it was widely known that ionizing radiation accelerated their formation.
But it was just at this time that the national research priorities of the U.S.
were redirected toward genetic explanations for all major diseases, with for
example the “war on cancer” centering on the concepts of the “oncogene” and
the cancer virus. Since the “slow virus” of cancer, or the viral oncogene,
requires activation by something in the environment, its function is to
distract the public’s attention from those environmental causes of disease,
viz., radiation and chemical pollution. The U.S. Public Health Service has
historically been one of the branches of the military, and currently has 6000
commissioned officers. It has been intimately involved in all aspects of
chemical, biological, and nuclear warfare, and it has participated in many
covert projects, including experimentation on people without their knowledge.
For decades, information on radiation injury to the public was hidden,
classified, altered, or destroyed by the PHS. During the radiation disaster at
Three Mile Island, they calmly defended the interests of the nuclear industry.
After the April, 1986 catastrophe at the reactor in Chernobyl, some of the
food being imported into the U.S. was so highly radioactive that the FDA
secretly seized it, to prevent the public from being concerned. The first cow
found to have BSE in England was in November, 1986, several months after
England’s pastures had been heavily contaminated by rainfall carrying
radioactive material from Chernobyl, which soaked into the soil and continued
to contaminate crops for years (and will continue, for centuries). The number
of sick cows increased rapidly to a peak in 1992. Human deaths from the
similar disease (“variant CJD”) began a few years later. In June, 2000, a
wildfire burned across southern Washington, turning the radioactive vegetation
on the Hanford Nuclear Site into radioactive smoke, contaminating a wide area,
including farms, dairies, and orchards. In 2003, the first cow in the U.S.
with BSE was reported, from a dairy a few miles from the Hanford Site.
Beginning in 1946, Bikini Island was used to test atomic bombs. In 1954, they
began to test hydrogen bombs in the Pacific; some of the bombs were
deliberately designed to vaporize whole islands, so that the effects of
radioactive fallout could be studied. In 1954, the first child with kuru was
reported in the rainy highlands of New Guinea. Within two years, hundreds of
people in that area (of the Fore tribe) were dying from kuru, with the
mortality highest among the women; in some villages, the majority of the women
died from the disease, but by 1957 the mortality was falling rapidly. Between
1957 and 1964, 5% of the population of the Fore tribe died of the disease,
according to D.C. Gajdusek, who had been sent by the U.S. Army to investigate
the disease. Although Gajdusek graduated in 1946 from Harvard medical school
as a pediatrician, in his autobiography he said that when he was drafted in
1951, the army assigned him to work in virology. In 1958, Gajdusek became
director of the NIH laboratories for neurological and virological research.
This was a remarkable achievement for someone who had supposedly only done
some scattered field-work in infectious diseases, and whose purpose in going
to New Guinea had been to study ''child growth and development in primitive
cultures.'' The only published reason I have found that might be a basis for
making him head of neurology, was his sending a diseased Fore brain to Fort
Detrick in 1957. Gajdusek claimed to have seen the Fore people eating dead
relatives, but his figures show that the disease was already in rapid decline
when he arrived. He took photographs which were widely published in the US,
supposedly showing cannibalism, but 30 years later, he said the photographs
showed people eating pork, and that he had seen no cannibalism. (At the time
Gajdusek was observing kuru in New Guinea, the influence of “cannibalism” on
brain function was already in the news, because of the discovery by J.V.
McConnell that the behavior of “trained” flatworms could be transmitted to
other worms by chopping them up and feeding them to the naive worms.) Harvard
medical school, in association with the military program centered at Fort
Detrick, Fredericksburg, Maryland, was active in biological warfare in the
1940s, and I think it’s more plausible to see Gajdusek as a trouble-shooter
for the biological warfare establishment, than as a biological researcher. One
of his biographers has written that the idea of associating kuru with scrapie
was suggested to him by a veterinarian, and that Gajdusek had responded by
claiming to have experiments in progress to test that theory, four years
before the experiments were actually made. In other words, the slow virus
theory for which Gajdusek was given the Nobel Prize is scientific junk, which
Gajdusek has repeatedly reinterpreted retrospectively, making it seem to have
been anticipatory of the prion theory. Whatever actually caused kuru, I think
the army was afraid that it was the result of radioactive fallout from one of
its bomb tests, and that Gajdusek’s job was to explain it away. I suspect that
kuru was the result of an unusual combination of malnutrition (the women were
vegetarian) and radiation. In the very short time that Gajdusek spent in New
Guinea, he claimed to have done studies to eliminate all of the alternative
causes, nutritional, toxic, anthropological, bacterial causes, studies that
would normally have required several years of well organized work. I don’t
think he mentioned the possibility of radiation poisoning. In 1998 Congress
commissioned a study of the health effects of radiation from bomb testing, and
although the study examined the effects of only part of the bomb tests, it
concluded that they had killed 15,000 Americans. No one has tried to
accurately estimate the numbers killed in other countries. Even very low doses
of ionizing radiation create an inflammatory reaction (Vickers, et al., 1991),
and there is evidence that the inflammatory state can persist as long as the
individual lives; in Japan, the “acute phase” proteins are still elevated in
the people who were exposed to radiation from the atomic bombs. The acute
phase proteins that are increased by malnutrition and radiation increase the
tendency to form amyloid deposits. Strong radiation can even cause, after a
delay of more than a year, the development of vacuoles, which are the most
obvious feature of the “prion” brain diseases. The persistent inflammatory
reaction eventually produces cellular changes, but these were originally
overlooked because of the theory that radiation is harmful only when it
produces immediate changes in the DNA. Radiation damage to the brain is most
visible early in life, and in old age. In 1955, Alice Stewart showed that
prenatal x-rays increase the incidence of brain cancer, leukemia, and other
cancers. In 1967, a study in Japanese bomb survivors found that prenatal
exposure to radiation had reduced their head size and brain size. In 1979,
Sternglass and Bell showed extremely close correspondence between scores on
the SAT and prenatal exposure to radiation. Serum amyloid A, which can
increase 1000-fold under the influence of proinflammatory cytokines, resulting
from irradiation, stress, trauma, or infection, is an activator of
phospholipase A2 (PLA2), which releases fatty acids. Some of the
neurodegenerative states, including amyloid-prion diseases, involve activated
PLA2, as well as increases in the toxic breakdown products of the
polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as 4-hydroxynonenal. The quantity of PUFA in
the tissues strongly determines the susceptibility of the tissue to injury by
radiation and other stresses. But a diet rich in PUFA will produce brain
damage even without exceptional stressors, when there aren’t enough
antioxidants, such as vitamin E and selenium, in the diet. Amyloidosis has
traditionally been thought of as a condition involving deposits mainly in
blood vessels, kidneys, joints and skin and in extracellular spaces in the
brain, and the fact that the “amyloid” stained in a certain way led to the
idea that it was a single protein. But as more proteins--currently about 20--
were identified in amyloid deposits, it was gradually realized that the
deposits can be identified inside cells of many different tissues, before the
larger, very visible, extracellular deposits are formed. There is evidence of
a steady increase in the death rate from amyloidosis. It kills women at a
younger age than men, often at the age of 50 or 60. Serum amyloid P is called
“the female protein” in hamsters, because of its association with estrogen;
castrated (or estrogen treated) males also produce large amounts of it, and
its excess is associated with the deposition of amyloid (Coe and Ross, 1985).
It can bind other amyloid proteins together, accelerating the formation of
fibrils, but this function is probably just a variation of a normal function
in immunity, tissue repair, and development. Estrogen increases the
inflammation-associated substances such as IL-6, C-reactive protein, and
amyloid, and liberates fatty acids, especially the unstable polyunsaturated
fatty acids. It also increases fibrinogen and decreases albumin, increasing
the leakiness of capillaries. The decrease of albumin increases the
concentration of free fatty acids and tryptophan, which would normally be
bound to albumin. In the U.S. and Europe, livestock are fed large amounts of
high-protein feeds, and currently these typically contain fish meal and
soybeans. The estrogenic materials in soybeans increase the animals’ tendency
toward inflammation (with increased serum amyloid). Officially, BSE appeared
because cows were fed slaughter-house waste containing tissues of sheep that
had died of scrapie. Scrapie was a nerve disease of sheep, first reported in
Iceland in the 18th century. When I was studying the digestive system and
nutrition of horses, I learned that it was common for horses in Norway to be
fed dried fish during the winter. This abundant food was probably used for
sheep, as well as for horses. The extra protein provided by fish meal is still
important for sheep in areas where pastures are limited, but it has now become
common to use it to increase productivity and growth throughout the lamb,
beef, and dairy industries, as well as in most lab chows fed to experimental
animals, such as the hamsters used for testing the infectivity of the diseased
tissues. Increased dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) suppress the
activity of the ruminal bacteria which are responsible for the hydrogenation-
detoxication of PUFA in the animal’s diet. This allows the unstable fats, 98%
of which are normally destroyed, to pass into the animals’ tissues and milk.
The polyunsaturated fats in fish are very unstable, and when they get past the
bacterial saturases (biohydrogenases) in the rumen that normally protect
ruminants from lipid peroxidation, they are likely to cause their toxic
effects more quickly than in humans, whose antioxidant systems are highly
developed. The toxic effects of polyunsaturated fats involve altered
(immunogenic) protein structure, decreased energy metabolism, and many
inflammatory effects produced by the prostaglandin-like substances. Marine
fish are now so generally polluted with dioxin, that in Japan there is a clear
association between the amount of fish in a person’s diet (their body content
of EPA and DHA) and the amount of dioxin in their body. Radiation and many
kinds of poisoning cause early peroxidation of those highly unsaturated fats,
and the breakdown products accelerate the changes in the folding and chelating
behavior of proteins. The accumulation of altered proteins is associated with
the degenerative diseases. The role of toxic metals in brain inflammation is
well established (e.g., aluminum, lead, mercury: Campbell, et al., 2004; Dave,
et al., 1994; Ronnback and Hansson, 1992). The “prion hypothesis” has the
value of weakening the fanaticism of the DNA-genetics doctrine, but it has
some problems. There are now several examples in which other degenerative
diseases have been transmitted by procedures similar to those used to test the
scrapie agent. (e.g., Goudsmit, et al., 1980; Xing, et al., 2001; Cui, et al.,
2002.) Experimental controls haven’t been adequate to distinguish between the
pure prion and its associated impurities. Gajdusek burned a sample of the
infective hamster brain to ash, and found that it still retained
“infectivity.” He argued that there was a mineral template that transmitted
the toxic conformation to normal proteins. Others have demonstrated that the
active structure of the infective agent is maintained by a carbohydrate
scaffolding, or that the infectivity is destroyed by the frequency of
ultraviolet light that destroys the active lipid of bacterial endotoxin,
lipopolysaccharide. But simply injuring the brain or other organ (by injecting
anything) will sometimes activate a series of reactions similar to those seen
in aging and the amyloidoses. When a slight trauma leads to a prolonged or
expanding disturbance of structure and function, the process isn’t essentially
different from transmitting a condition to another individual. The problem is
being “transmitted” from the initial injury, recruiting new cells, and passing
the disturbed state on to daughter cells in a disturbed form of regeneration.
Keloids, hypertrophic scars, are analogous to the dementias in their
overgrowth of connective tissue cells: In the aging or injured brain, the
glial cells (mainly astrocytes) proliferate, in reparative processes that
sometimes become exaggerated and harmful. When tissue phospholipids contain
large amounts of polyunsaturated fatty acids, large amounts of prostaglandins
are immediately formed by any injury, including low doses of ionizing
radiation. The liberated free fatty acids have many other effects, including
the formation of highly reactive aldehydes, which modify DNA, proteins, and
other cell components. Animals which are “deficient” in the polyunsaturated
fatty acids have a great resistance to a variety of inflammatory challenges.
Their tissues appear to be poor allergens or antigens, since they can be
easily grafted onto other animals without rejection. Something related to this
can probably be seen in the data of human liver transplants. Women’s livers
are subjected to more lipid peroxidation than men’s, because of the effects of
estrogen (increasing growth hormone and free fatty acids, and selectively
mobilizing the polyunsaturated fatty acids and increasing their oxidation).
Liver transplants from middle-aged female donors fail much more often (40 to
45%) than livers from male donors (22 to 25%), and other organs show the same
effect. The autoimmune diseases are several times as common in women as in
men, suggesting that some tissues become relatively incompatible with their
own body, after prolonged exposure to the unstable fatty acids. If we consider
the healthy function of the immune system to be the removal or correction of
injured tissue, it’s reasonable to view the random interactions of oxidized
fats with proteins as exactly the sort of thing our immune system takes care
of. The serum amyloids A and P and the closely related lipoproteins are
considered to be important parts of our “innate immunity,” operating in a more
general way than the familiar system of specific acquired immunities. The
amyloids and lipoproteins are powerfully responsive to bacterial endotoxin,
LPS, and their structural feature that binds it, the “pleated sheet”
structure, appears to also be what allows the amyloids to form amorphous
deposits and fibrils under some circumstances. Our innate immune system is
perfectly competent for handling our normal stress-induced exposures to
bacterial endotoxin, but as we accumulate the unstable fats, each exposure to
endotoxin creates additional inflammatory stress by liberating stored fats.
The brain has a very high concentration of complex fats, and is highly
susceptible to the effects of lipid peroxidative stress, which become
progressively worse as the unstable fats accumulate during aging. More than 60
years ago, a vitamin E deficiency was known to cause a brain disease,
sometimes associated with sterility and muscular dystrophy. The symptoms of
the brain disease were similar to those of “mad cow disease,” and the
condition is now usually called “crazy chick disease.” Veterinarians are
usually taught that it is caused by a selenium deficiency, but it is actually
the result of an excess of PUFA in the diet, and is exacerbated by increased
iron or other oxidants, and prevented by increased vitamin E, selenium, or
substitution of saturated fats for the unsaturated. Terminology, established
by tradition and thoughtless memorization, obscures many of the commonalities
in the various brain diseases. Brain inflammation (Betmouni and Perry, 1999;
Perry, et al., 1998), myelination disorders, edema, overgrowth of the
astroglia, and circulatory changes are common occurrences in most of the
degenerative encephalopathies, but traditional textbook descriptions have
created the impression that each disease is pathologically very distinct from
the others. The current classification of “the prion diseases” is reifying a
group of symptoms that aren’t specific to any specific known cause. And
standard laboratory procedures for preparing brain sections for microscopic
examination may cause brain cells to shrink to 5% of their original volume
(Hillman and Jarman, Atlas of the cellular structure of the human nervous
system, 1991), so the objectivity of pathological studies shouldn’t be over-
estimated. According to a 1989 study (Laura Manuelidis, neuropathology
department at Yale), 13% of the people who had died from “Alzheimer’s disease”
actually had CJD. Between 1979 and 2000, the number of people dying annually
from Alzheimer’s disease increased 50-fold. Very competent neuropathologists
differ radically in their descriptions of the dementia epidemic. By some
tests, the “prion” resembles the LPS endotoxin. One of the interesting
developments of the prion theory is that a particular structure that appears
when the prion becomes toxic, the “beta pleated sheet,” is also a feature of
most of the normal proteins that can form amyloid, and that this structure is
directly related to binding and eliminating the bacterial LPS. If the prion
theory is correct about the conversion of a normal protein into the pleated
sheet, it isn’t necessarily correct about the incurability of the condition.
The innate immune system should be able to inactivate the prion just as it
does the bacterial endotoxin, if we remove the conditions that cause the
innate immune reaction to amplify the inflammation beyond control. In the
prion diseases, the severely damaged brain appears to have a “pathological
overactivity” of the serotonergic systems (Fraser, et al., 2003). This is an
interesting parallel to Alzheimer’s disease, since it has been known for
several years that the blood platelets have an increased tendency to release
serotonin in that more common form of dementia. Serotonin itself is toxic to
nerves, and is part of the adaptive system that gets out of control during
prolonged inflammation. Serotonin is an important activator of the
phospholipases. The modification of proteins’ structure by glycosylation is
involved in the development of the toxic form of the “prionic” protein, as
well as in all the degenerative processes of aging. Until the ability to use
sugar is impaired, cells produce enough carbon dioxide to protect proteins
against random glycation, but with each exposure to free polyunsaturated fatty
acids, the ability to use glucose is damaged. In the dementias, the brain has
a greatly reduced ability to use glucose. One of estrogen’s central effects is
to shift metabolism away from the oxidation of glucose, decreasing carbon
dioxide production. There is a much higher incidence of Alzheimer’s disease in
women, and estrogen exposure exacerbates all of the changes that lead to it,
such as shifts in nerve transmitters, increased vascular leakiness, and the
increased production of the acute phase proteins. Everything that is known
about the “always fatal” prionic diseases, the diseases of disturbed protein
folding, suggests that they can be avoided and even reversed by systematically
reversing the processes that amplify inflammation. People who take aspirin,
drink coffee, and use tobacco, have a much lower incidence of Alzheimer’s
disease than people who don’t use those things. Caffeine inhibits brain
phospholipase, making it neuroprotective in a wide spectrum of conditions. In
recent tests, aspirin has been found to prevent the misfolding of the prion
protein, and even to reverse the misfolded beta sheet conformation, restoring
it to the harmless normal conformation. Nicotine might have a similar effect,
preventing deposition of amyloid fibrils and disrupting those already formed
(Ono, et al., 2002). Vitamin E, aspirin, progesterone, and nicotine also
inhibit phospholipase, which contributes to their antiinflammatory action.
Each of the amyloid-forming proteins probably has molecules that interfere
with its toxic accumulation. Thyroid hormone, vitamins A and E, niacinamide
(to inhibit systemic lipolysis), magnesium, calcium, progesterone, sugar,
saturated fats, and gelatin all contribute in basic ways to prevention of the
inflammatory states that eventually lead to the amyloid diseases. The scarcity
of degenerative brain disease in high altitude populations is consistent with
a protective role for carbon dioxide. The relatively sudden acceptability of
the idea of non-genetic transmission doesn't mean that Lamarck has been
rehabilitated by the scientific establishment; it could just be that it's the
most politically acceptable way to explain the outbreaks of deadly disease
caused by the industrialization of foods and the exposure of the population to
dangerous levels of radiation. REFERENCES J Autoimmun. 1989 Aug;2(4):543-52.
Estrogen induces the development of autoantibodies and promotes salivary gland
lymphoid infiltrates in normal mice. Ahmed SA, Aufdemorte TB, Chen JR, Montoya
AI, Olive D, Talal N. “We hypothesize that an imbalance of the in utero sex
hormone microenvironment critically influences the fetal immune system. We
have termed this influence immunological imprinting. After birth this
imprinting could contribute to immune-mediated disorders. To test this
hypothesis, we developed a mouse model in which normal mice were prenatally
exposed to estrogens. In preliminary experiments, these mice produced higher
numbers of APFC to Br-ME, particularly in the peritoneal cavity cell exudates.
Furthermore, mice prenatally exposed to estrogens had accelerated development
of autoimmune salivary gland lesions indistinguishable from Sjogren's syndrome
(SS) in humans.” J Gen Virol. 1978 Dec;41(3):503-16. The scrapie agent:
evidence against its dependence for replication on intrinsic nucleic acid.
Alper T, Haig DA, Clarke MC. Exposure of the scrapie agent to u.v. light at
various wavelengths has shown that light of 237 nm is 4 to 5 times as
effective in inactivating it as 'germicidal' wavelengths (250 to 270 nm);
whereas with systems that depend on RNA or DNA for function, inactivation is
most effective by wavelengths in the germicidal range and there is a minimum
of response in the wavelength region round 240 nm. The action spectrum for the
scrapie agent is reminiscent of the absorption spectrum for purified bacterial
endotoxin, identified as a lipopolysaccharide complex. Am J Pathol. 1971 Oct;
65(1): 43-50. Disseminated amyloidosis in germfree mice. Spontaneous
prevalence, relationship to ionizing radiation and pathogenetic implications.
Anderson RE. Neurobiol Dis. 2002 Dec; 11(3): 386-93. Astrocytes accumulate
4-hydroxynonenal adducts in murine scrapie and human Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease. Andreoletti O, Levavasseur E, Uro-Coste E, Tabouret G, Sarradin P,
Delisle MB, Berthon P, Salvayre R, Schelcher F, Negre-Salvayre A. Biol Chem.
1999 Nov;380(11):1295-306. Prion rods contain an inert polysaccharide
scaffold. Appel TR, Dumpitak C, Matthiesen U, Riesner D. “Only glucose was
obtained by acid hydrolysis of the remnant and methylation analysis showed 80%
1,4-, 15% 1,6- and 5% 1,4,6-linked glucose units. The physical and chemical
properties as well as the absence of terminal glucose units indicate a very
high molecular mass of the polysaccharide. No evidence was found for covalent
bonds between PrP and the polysaccharide. The polysaccharide certainly
contributes to the unusual chemical and physical stability of prion rods,
acting like a scaffold.” Arch Neurol. 1974 Sep; 31(3): 174-82. Altered cell
membranes in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Microchemical studies. Bass NH, Hess
HH, Pope A. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 1999 Feb;25(1):20-8. The acute
inflammatory response in CNS following injection of prion brain homogenate or
normal brain homogenate. Betmouni S, Perry VH. “The neuropathological
hallmarks of end-stage prion disease are vacuolation, neuronal loss,
astrocytosis and deposition of PrPSc amyloid. We have also shown that there is
an inflammatory response in the brains of scrapie-affected mice from 8 weeks
post-injection.” “The well circumscribed inflammatory response seen previously
at 8 weeks is therefore a consequence of a disease process rather than a
surgical artefact. This disease process may be related to a localized
accumulation of PrPSc sufficient to stimulate an inflammatory response which
in turn may contribute to neuronal loss.” Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 1999
Feb; 25(1): 20-8. The acute inflammatory response in CNS following injection
of prion brain homogenate or normal brain homogenate. Betmouni S, Perry VH.
Curr Biol. 1999 Sep 23;9(18):R677-9. Vacuolation in murine prion disease: an
informative artifact. Betmouni S, Clements J, Perry VH. Neuroscience. 1996
Sep; 74(1): 1-5. Evidence for an early inflammatory response in the central
nervous system of mice with scrapie. Betmouni S, Perry VH, Gordon JL. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1982;396:131-43. Alzheimer's disease and transmissible virus dementia
(Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease). Brown P, Salazar AM, Gibbs CJ Jr, Gajdusek DC.
Neuroscience. 1996 Sep;74(1):1-5. Evidence for an early inflammatory response
in the central nervous system of mice with scrapie. Betmouni S, Perry VH,
Gordon JL. “In Alzheimer's disease, the most prevalent of the
neurodegenerative diseases, inflammation of the CNS contributes to the
pathology and is a target for therapy. In contrast, the group of
neurodegenerative conditions known as the Prion Diseases have been widely
reported as lacking any inflammatory elements despite the many similarities
between the pathologies of Alzheimer's Disease and Prion Diseases We have
found evidence for an inflammatory component in mouse scrapie, characterized
by microglial activation and T-lymphocyte recruitment, which appears long
before any clinical signs of the disease and spreads along well-defined
anatomical pathways.” Nat Med. 1999 Jun;5(6):694-7. Serum amyloid P component
controls chromatin degradation and prevents antinuclear autoimmunity.
Bickerstaff MC, Botto M, Hutchinson WL, Herbert J, Tennent GA, Bybee A,
Mitchell DA, Cook HT, Butler PJ, Walport MJ, Pepys MB. “Serum amyloid P
component (SAP) . . . is the single normal circulating protein that shows
specific calcium-dependent binding to DNA and chromatin in physiological
conditions. The avid binding of SAP displaces H1-type histones and thereby
solubilizes native long chromatin, which is otherwise profoundly insoluble at
the physiological ionic strength of extracellular fluids.” “Here we show that
mice with targeted deletion of the SAP gene spontaneously develop antinuclear
autoimmunity and severe glomerulonephritis, a phenotype resembling human
systemic lupus erythematosus, a serious autoimmune disease.” “These findings
indicate that SAP has an important physiological role, inhibiting the
formation of pathogenic autoantibodies against chromatin and DNA, probably by
binding to chromatin and regulating its degradation.” J Neurosci Res. 2004 Feb
15;75(4):565-72. Chronic exposure to aluminum in drinking water increases
inflammatory parameters selectively in the brain. Campbell A, Becaria A,
Lahiri DK, Sharman K, Bondy SC. Mutat Res. 2001 Mar; 488(1): 39-64. Mutation
processes at the protein level: is Lamarck back? Chernoff YO. “The
experimental evidence accumulated for the last half of the century clearly
suggests that inherited variation is not restricted to the changes in genomic
sequences. The prion model, originally based on unusual transmission of
certain neurodegenerative diseases in mammals, provides a molecular mechanism
for the template-like reproduction of alternative protein conformations.
Recent data extend this model to protein-based genetic elements in yeast and
other fungi.” “Prion-forming abilities appear to be conserved in evolution,
despite the divergence of the corresponding amino acid sequences. Moreover, a
wide variety of proteins of different origins appear to possess the ability to
form amyloid-like aggregates, that in certain conditions might potentially
result in prion-like switches. This suggests a possible mechanism for the
inheritance of acquired traits, postulated in the Lamarckian theory of
evolution.” J Clin Invest. 1985 Jul;76(1):66-74. Hamster female protein, a
sex-limited pentraxin, is a constituent of Syrian hamster amyloid. Coe JE,
Ross MJ. Pathol Int. 2002 Jan; 52(1): 40-5. Acceleration of murine AA
amyloidosis by oral administration of amyloid fibrils extracted from different
species. Cui D, Kawano H, Takahashi M, Hoshii Y, Setoguchi M, Gondo T,
Ishihara T. “We herein report that experimental murine amyloid A (AA)
deposition is accelerated by oral administration of semipurified amyloid
fibrils extracted from different species. Three groups of mice were treated
with semipurified murine AA amyloid fibrils, semipurified bovine AA amyloid
fibrils or semipurified human light chain-derived (A(lambda)) amyloid fibrils
for 10 days. After 3 weeks, each mouse was subjected to inflammatory
stimulation by subcutaneous injection with a mixture of complete Freund's
adjuvant supplemented with Mycobacterium butyricum.” “Amyloid deposits were
detected in 14 out of 15 mice treated with murine AA amyloid fibrils, 12 out
of 15 mice treated with bovine AA amyloid fibrils and 11 out of 15 mice
treated with human A(lambda) amyloid fibrils. No amyloid deposits were
detected in control mice receiving the inflammatory stimulant alone or in
amyloid fibril-treated mice without inflammatory stimulation. Our results
suggest that AA amyloid deposition is accelerated by oral administration of
semipurified amyloid fibrils when there is a concurrent inflammatory
stimulation.” Br J Pharmacol. 2003 Apr;138(7):1207-9. Neuroprotection by
caffeine and adenosine A2A receptor blockade of beta-amyloid neurotoxicity.
Dall'lgna OP, Porciuncula LO, Souza DO, Cunha RA, Lara DR. “This constitutes
the first in vitro evidence to suggest that adenosine A(2A) receptors may be
the molecular target responsible for the observed beneficial effects of
caffeine consumption in the development of Alzheimer's disease.” Biochemistry.
2003 Nov 25; 42(46): 13667-72. Insertion of externally administered amyloid
beta peptide 25-35 and perturbation of lipid bilayers. Dante S, Hauss T,
Dencher NA. “For a very long time, the aggregated form of the Abeta was
supposed to be responsible for the neurodegeneration that occurs in AD.
Recently, the attention has been diverted to the monomeric or oligomeric forms
of Abeta and their interaction with cellular targets.” Dev Neurosci.
1994;16(3-4):222-31. Astrocytes as mediators of methylmercury neurotoxicity:
effects on D-aspartate and serotonin uptake. Dave V, Mullaney KJ, Goderie S,
Kimelberg HK, Aschner M. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1989; 266: 259-70; discussion 271.
Phospholipases and the molecular basis for the formation of ceroid in Batten
Disease. Dawson G, Dawson SA, Siakotos AN. “Lysosomal ceroid/lipofuscinosis
storage in human, canine, and ovine forms of neuronal ceroidlipofuscinosis is
predominantly in neurons and retinal pigment epithelial cells. Despite
problems in identifying individual storage materials, it is believed that non-
enzymic oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids in phospholipids and inhibition
of lysosomal proteolysis, leading to massive deposition of autofluorescent
pigment, is the cause of the disease.” “We believe that the PLA1 deficiency
leads to transient lysosomal storage of phospholipids containing peroxy fatty
acids which are then chemically converted to hydroxynonenal, a potent
inhibitor of a thiol-dependent enzymes. Inhibition of proteases is believed to
be intrinsic to the formation of lipofuscin.” Ann Rheum Dis. 2001
Jul;60(7):694-5. Concomitant diagnosis of primary Sjogren's syndrome and
systemic AL amyloidosis. Delevaux I, Andre M, Amoura Z, Kemeny JL, Piette JC,
Aumaitre O. Mol Biol Rep. 1996;23(3-4):253-60. The interaction of C-reactive
protein and serum amyloid P component with nuclear antigens. Du Clos TW. “The
pentraxins are a family of proteins characterized by cyclic pentameric
structure, calcium-dependent ligand binding and sequence homology. The two
main representatives of this family are the serum proteins, C-reactive protein
(CRP) and serum amyloid P component (SAP). In man CRP is an acute phase
reactant which increases up to 1,000 fold during the acute phaseresponse
whereas SAP is a constitutive protein expressed at about 30 micrograms/ml.
These proteins activate complement through the classical pathway and
participate in opsonization of particulate antigensand bacteria. In the past
several years it has been determined that both of these pentraxins interact
with nuclear antigens including chromatin and small nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(snRNPs). Both CRP and SAP have nuclear transport signals which facilitate
their entry into the nuclei of intact cells. Furthermore, these pentraxins
have been shown to affect the clearance of nuclear antigens in vivo.” Am J
Pathol. 1996 Oct;149(4):1313-20. Lipoproteins accumulate in immune deposits
and are modified by lipid peroxidation in passive Heymann nephritis. Exner M,
Susani M, Witztum JL, Hovorka A, Curtiss LK, Spitzauer S, Kerjaschki D. J Med
Genet. 1976 Dec;13(6):479-95. Scrapie: a review of its relation to human
disease and ageing. Field EJ. Age Ageing. 1978 Feb;7(1):28-39. Immunological
assessment of ageing: emergence of scrapie-like antigens. Field EJ. Acta
Neurol Scand. 1975 Apr;51(4):299-309. Cellular sensitization in kuru, Jakob-
Creutzfeldt disease and multiple sclerosis: with a note on the biohazards of
slow infection work. Field EJ, Shenton BK. Brain. 1973 Sep;96(3):629-36.
Altered response to scrapie tissues in neurological disease. Possible evidence
for an antigen associated with reactive astrocytes. Field EJ, Shenton BK.
Nature. 1973 Jul 20;244(5412):174-6. Scrapie-like antigen(s) in ageing
tissues. Field EJ, Shenton BK. Nature. 1973 Jul 13;244(5411):96-7. Rapid
immunological method for diagnosis of natural scrapie in sheep. Field EJ,
Shenton BK. Gerontologia. 1973;19(4):203-10. Thymectomy and immunological
ageing in mice: precocious emergence of scrapie-like antigen. Field EJ,
Shenton BK. Gerontologia. 1973;19(4):211-9. Emergence of new antigens in
ageing tissues. Field EJ, Shenton BK. Nature. 1972 Nov 10;240(5376):104-6.
Rapid diagnosis of scrapie in the mouse. Field EJ, Shenton BK. J Neurol Sci.
1972 Nov;17(3):347-64. An electron-microscopic study of scrapie in the rat:
further observations on "inclusion bodies" and virus-like particles. Field EJ,
Narang HK. Lancet. 1970 Oct 10;2(7676):780-1. Amyloidosis, Alzheimer's
disease, and ageing. Field EJ. Nature. 1970 Jun 6;226(249):971-3. Evidence
against transmission of scrapie by animal house fomites. Field EJ, Joyce G.
Arch Gesamte Virusforsch. 1970;30(2):224-37. The incorporation of (3H)
thymidine and (14C) glucosamine into a DNA-polysaccharide complex in normal
and scrapie-affected mouse brain. Adams DH, Caspary EA, Field EJ. Biochem J.
1969 Sep;114(2):19P-20P. Structural changes in scrapie affected brain. Field
EJ, Peat A. J Gen Virol. 1969 Jul;5(1):149-50. Failure of interferon to modify
scrapie in the mouse. Field EJ, Joyce G, Keith A. Nature. 1969 Apr
5;221(188):90-1. Susceptibility of scrapie agent to ionizing radiation. Field
EJ, Farmer F, Caspary EA, Joyce G. Nature. 1969 Mar 29;221(187):1265-6.
Neurological illness after inoculation of tissue from tumour bearing animals.
Field EJ, Adams DH, Joyce G. Lancet. 1968 May 4;1(7549):981-2. Transmission of
kuru to mice. Field EJ. Br J Exp Pathol. 1967 Dec;48(6):662-4. Invasion of the
mouse nervous system by scrapie agent. Field EJ. Acta Neuropathol (Berl). 1967
Nov 29;9(4):305-15. Scrapie in the rat: an electron-microscopic study. II.
Glial inclusions. Field EJ, Raine CS, Joyce G. J Neurosci. 2001 Jan
1;21(1):136-42. Vaccination for neuroprotection in the mouse optic nerve:
implications for optic Neuropathies. Fisher J, Levkovitch-Verbin H, Schori H,
Yoles E, Butovsky O, Kaye JF, Ben-Nun A, Schwartz M. “T-cell autoimmunity to
myelin basic protein was recently shown to be neuroprotective in injured rat
optic nerves.” “The results of this study show that survival of RGCs after
axonal injury can be enhanced by vaccination with an appropriate self-antigen.
Furthermore, the use of nonencephalitogenic myelin peptides for immunization
apparently allows neuroprotection without incurring the risk of an autoimmune
disease.” Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2003 Oct;29(5):482-95. Neuronal and
astrocytic responses involving the serotonergic system in human spongiform
encephalopathies. Fraser E, McDonagh AM, Head M, Bishop M, Ironside JW, Mann
DM. J Neural Transm. 2001;108(2):221-30. Difference in toxicity of beta-
amyloid peptide with aging in relation to nerve growth factor content in rat
brain. Fukuta T, Nitta A, Itoh A, Furukawa S, Nabeshima T. “NGF levels in the
hippocampus were increased only in adult rats. These results suggest that
Abeta is toxic only in the matured adult brain, and that the mechanism of
toxicity is related to NGF synthesis.” Science 197: 943-960(1977).
Unconventional viruses and the origin and disappearance of kuru. Gajdusek,
D.C. Trends Mol Med. 2001 Aug;7(8):336. Beneficial autoimmunity in traumatic
brain injury. Gurwitz D. BMJ 2004; 328 :19, Effect of low doses of ionising
radiation in infancy on cognitive function in adulthood: Swedish population
based cohort study. Hall P, Adami HO, Trichopoulos D et al. Arch Pathol. 1966
Oct; 82(4): 353-5. A lipofuscin-like pigment in the kidneys of estrogen-
treated rats. Harris C. Int J Radiat Biol. 2003 Feb; 79(2): 129-36. Radiation
dose-dependent increases in inflammatory response markers in A-bomb Survivors.
Hayashi T, Kusunoki Y, Hakoda M, Morishita Y, Kubo Y, Maki M, Kasagi F, Kodama
K, Macphee DG, Kyoizumi S. “The well-documented increases in malignant tumours
in the A-bomb survivors have recently been supplemented by reports that non-
cancer diseases, including cardiovascular disease, may also have increased in
incidence with increasing radiation dose. Given that low-level inflammatory
responses are widely accepted as a significant risk factor for such diseases,
we undertook a detailed investigation of the long-term effects of ionizing
radiation on the levels of the inflammatory markers C-reactive protein (CRP)
and interleukin 6 (IL-6) in A-bomb survivors.” “Blood samples were taken from
453 participants in a long-term epidemiological cohort of A-bomb survivors.”
“CRP levels were significantly increased by about 31% Gy(-1) of estimated
A-bomb radiation (p=0.0001). Higher CRP levels also correlated with age, male
gender, body mass index and a history of myocardial infarction. After
adjustments for these factors, CRP levels still appeared to have increased
significantly with increasing radiation dose (about 28% increase at 1Gy,
p=0.0002). IL-6 levels also appeared to have increased with radiation dose by
9.3% at 1Gy (p=0.0003) and after multiple adjustments by 9.8% at 1Gy
(p=0.0007).” “Our results appear to indicate that exposure to A-bomb radiation
has caused significant increases in inflammatory activity that are still
demonstrable in the blood of A-bomb survivors and which may lead to increased
risks of cardiovascular disease and other non-cancer diseases.” Immunol Rev.
2000 Oct;177:52-67. Chemokines and chemokine receptors in inflammation of the
nervous system: manifold roles and exquisite regulation. Huang D, Han Y, Rani
MR, Glabinski A, Trebst C, Sorensen T, Tani M, Wang J, Chien P, O'Bryan S,
Bielecki B, Zhou ZL, Majumder S, Ransohoff RM. Am J Med Genet. 1989
Dec;34(4):562-8. Mortality rate of amyloidosis in Japan: secular trends and
geographical Variations. Imaizumi Y. “The death rate in Japan from amyloidosis
was analyzed using Japanese Vital Statistics for 1969-1985. The amyloidosis
death rate has increased gradually year by year for both sexes.” “The mean age
at death from amyloidosis gradually increased year by year for both sexes,
although the age was 11-23 years shorter for males and 20-25 years shorter for
females than that of the general population.” Stroke. 1991 Nov;22(11):1448-51.
Platelet secretory products may contribute to neuronal injury. Joseph R,
Tsering C, Grunfeld S, Welch KM. J Neurochem. 1997 Jul; 69(1): 266-72.
Aggregation of beta-amyloid peptide is promoted by membrane phospholipid
metabolites elevated in Alzheimer's disease brain. Klunk WE, Xu CJ, McClure
RJ, Panchalingam K, Stanley JA, Pettegrew JW. “A beta peptides have been shown
to be toxic to neurons in cell culture, and this toxicity is critically
dependent on the aggregation of the peptide into cross-beta-pleated sheet
fibrils. Also, in vivo and postmortem NMR studies have shown changes in
certain brain membrane phospholipid metabolites in normal aging and more
extensive alterations in patients with Alzheimer's disease. The finding that
membrane phospholipids affect the aggregation of A beta suggests that the
abnormalities in membrane metabolism found in Alzheimer's disease could affect
the deposition of A beta in vivo.” “Certain metabolites
(glycerophosphocholine, glycerophosphoethanolamine, and alpha-
glycerophosphate) augment the aggregation of A beta. Other membrane
phospholipid metabolites (phosphocholine, phosphoethanolamine, and
inositol-1-phosphate) have no effect.We conclude that increased membrane
phospholipid metabolite concentrations may play a role in the deposition of A
beta seen in normal aging and the even greater deposition of A beta observed
in Alzheimer's disease.” J Pharm Sci. 1971 Feb; 60(2): 167-80. Experimental
modification of the chemistry and biology of the aging process. Kormendy CG,
Bender AD. Radiobiologiia. 1990 May-Jun;30(3):317-20. [Cholesterol and fatty
acids of the nuclei and chromatin of the rat thymus at long intervals
following gamma irradiation] Kulagina TP. “The FFA content in the homogenate,
nuclei and chromatin of rat thymus drastically increased 60 min after the last
exposure. In a month, the FFA content of nuclei and chromatin dropped to
control levels, whereas that of the homogenate remained high throughout the
entire period of observation and sharply increased by the third month.” J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1968 Jan; 27(1): 157-8. Amyloid in late postradiation
necrosis of brain. Mandybur TJ, Gore y. Hepatology. 1995 Dec;22(6):1754-62.
Effect of donor age and sex on the outcome of liver transplantation. Marino
IR, Doyle HR, Aldrighetti L, Doria C, McMichael J, Gayowski T, Fung JJ, Tzakis
AG, Starzl TE. Brain Res. 673(1), 149-152, 1995. "Glucose deprivation
increases aspartic acid release from synaptosomes of aged mice,"M. Martinez,
et al., "...in the absence of glucose in the medium of incubation aspartate
and glutamate release was higher in old than in young animals." "...there is
an age-dependent dysfunction in this process linked to energy metabolism
disturbance." Neurobiol Aging. 1995 Nov-Dec; 16(6): 977-81. Estrogen induction
of glial heat shock proteins: implications for hypothalamic Aging. Mydlarski
MB, Liberman A, Schipper HM. “In the aging mammalian hypothalamus, a unique
subpopulation of glial cells accumulates peroxidase-positive cytoplasmic
inclusions distinct from lipofuscin. In adult rodents, this senescence-
dependent glial granulation is accelerated by administration of estradiol
valerate.” “Our findings indicate that estrogen elicits a heat shock response
and subsequent granulation in astrocytes residing in estradiol receptor-rich
brain regions including the arcuate nucleus and the wall surrounding the third
ventricle but not in estradiol receptor-deficient regions such as the striatum
and corpus callosum. The heat shock proteins induced by estrogen, namely, the
27, 72, and 90 kDa stress proteins, are upregulated in astrocytes in response
to oxidative challenge supporting our hypothesis that estrogen mediates
senescent changes in the rodent hypothalamus through oxidative mechanisms.”
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 44, pp. 712-717 (1958): "Epigenetic Control
Systems". D. L. Nanney. Journal of the Neurological Sciences 1995;134:61-6.
Mortality from motor neuron disease in Japan, 1950-1990: association with
radioactive fallout from atmospheric weapons testing. Neilson S, Robinson I,
Rose FC. Biol Psychiatry. 2002 Nov 1;52(9):880-6. Nicotine breaks down
preformed Alzheimer's beta-amyloid fibrils in vitro. Ono K, Hasegawa K, Yamada
M, Naiki H. “The antiamyloidogenic effect of nicotine may be exerted not only
by the inhibition of fAbeta formation but also by the disruption of preformed
fAbeta.” Res Immunol. 1998 Sep-Oct; 149(7-8): 721-5. The contribution of
inflammation to acute and chronic neurodegeneration. Perry VH, Bolton SJ,
Anthony DC, Betmouni S. Neurology. 1966 Oct;16(10):957-62. Myxedema and
ataxia. Cerebellar alterations and "neural myxedema bodies". Price TR, Netsky
MG. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 18;100(4):1580-5. Epub 2003 Feb 03.
Short-term administration of omega 3 fatty acids from fish oil results in
increased transthyretin transcription in old rat hippocampus. Puskas LG,
Kitajka K, Nyakas C, Barcelo-Coblijn G, Farkas T. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002
Apr 1;400(1):43-7. Inhibition of transthyretin amyloid fibril formation by
2,4-dinitrophenol through tetramer stabilization. Raghu P, Reddy GB, Sivakumar
B. Br J Ind Med. 1992 Apr;49(4):233-40. Chronic encephalopathies induced by
mercury or lead: aspects of underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms.
Ronnback L, Hansson E. Radiat Res. 1967 Mar; 30(3): 640-53. Radiation studies
on mice of an inbred tumor-resistant strain. The alteration of endogenous
susceptibility to amyloidosis by x-irradiation. Rosenblum WI, Goldfeder A,
Ghosh AK. Neurotoxicology 15(3), 493-502, 1994."Phosphoinositide second
messengers in cholinergic excitotoxicity," K. Savolainen, et al.
"Acetylcholine is a powerful excitotoxic neurotransmitter in the brain. By
stimulating calcium-mobilizing receptors, acetylcholine, through G-proteins,
stimulates phospholipase C and cause the hydrolysis of a membrane
phospholipid...."Female sex and senescence increase the sensitivity of rats to
cholinergic excitotoxicity." Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1995 Jan
1;31(1):57-64. Radiation-induced changes in the profile of spinal cord
serotonin, prostaglandin synthesis, and vascular permeability. Siegal T,
Pfeffer MR. “Serotonin levels were unchanged at 2, 14,and 56 days after
radiation but increased at 120 and 240 days in the irradiated cord segments
when compared to both the nonirradiated thoracic and cervical segments (p <
0.01) and age-matched controls (p < 0.03).” “In the first 24 h after
radiation, a 104% increase in microvessel permeability was observed which
returned to normal by 3 days. Normal permeability was maintained at 14 and 28
days, but at 120 and 240 days a persistent and significant increase of 98% and
73% respectively above control level was noted.” Annual Meeting of the
American Psychological Association, New York, New York, September 3, 1979,
"Fallout and the Decline of Scholastic Aptitude Scores," Ernest Sternglass and
Stephen Bell. Acta Neuropathol (Berl). 1995; 90(2): 135-41. Cerebral beta
amyloid deposition in patients with malignant neoplasms: its prevalence with
aging and effects of radiation therapy on vascular amyloid. Sugihara S, Ogawa
A, Nakazato Y, Yamaguchi H. “The prevalence of cerebral A beta deposits was
about two times higher in the patients who had received brain radiation
therapy (27.8%) compared to non-radiated patients (14.8%). Amyloid angiopathy
was much more prominent (P < 0.05) with radiation therapy (22.2%) than without
(8.0%).” Diabetes. 2003 Dec;52(12):2882-7. Elevation of free fatty acids
induces inflammation and impairs vascular reactivity in healthy subjects.
Tripathy D, Mohanty P, Dhindsa S, Syed T, Ghanim H, Aljada A, Dandona P.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003 Dec 29. Effect of Lower Dosage of Oral
Conjugated Equine Estrogen on Inflammatory Markers and Endothelial Function in
Healthy Postmenopausal Women. Wakatsuki A, Ikenoue N, Shinohara K, Watanabe K,
Fukaya T. {Oral estrogen) “... increases plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) concentration. The proinflammatory effect of oral ERT may
explain the increased risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) associated with
this treatment.” Am J Pathol. 1997 Jun; 150(6): 2181-95. Free fatty acids
stimulate the polymerization of tau and amyloid beta peptides.In vitro
evidence for a common effector of pathogenesis in Alzheimer's disease. Wilson
DM, Binder LI. “We have discovered that free fatty acids (FFAs) stimulate the
assembly of both amyloid and tau filaments in vitro.” “Utilizing fluorescence
spectroscopy, unsaturated FFAs were also demonstrated to induce beta-amyloid
assembly.” [These results] “...suggest that cortical elevations of FFAs may
constitute a unifying stimulatory event driving the formation of two of the
obvious pathogenetic lesions in Alzheimer's disease.” Lab Invest. 2001 Apr;
81(4): 493-9. Transmission of mouse senile amyloidosis. Xing Y, Nakamura A,
Chiba T, Kogishi K, Matsushita T, Li F, Guo Z, Hosokawa M, Mori M, Higuchi K.
“In mouse senile amyloidosis, apolipoprotein A-II polymerizes into amyloid
fibrils (AApoAII) and deposits systemically. Peripheral injection of AApoAII
fibrils into young mice induces systemic amyloidosis....” “We isolated AApoAII
amyloid fibrils from the livers of old R1.P1-Apoa2(c) mice and injected them
with feeding needles into the stomachs of young R1.P1-Apoa2(c) mice for 5
consecutive days. After 2 months, all mice had AApoAII deposits in the lamina
propria of the small intestine. Amyloid deposition extended to the tongue,
stomach, heart, and liver at 3 and 4 months after feeding. AApoAII suspended
in drinking water also induced amyloidosis.” “Amyloid deposition was induced
in young mice reared in the same cage for 3 months with old mice who had
severe amyloidosis. Detection of AApoAII in feces of old mice and induction of
amyloidosis by the injection of an amyloid fraction of feces suggested the
propagation of amyloidosis by eating feces. Here, we substantiate the
transmissibility of AApoAII amyloidosis and present a possible pathogenesis of
amyloidosis, ie, oral transmission of amyloid fibril conformation, where we
assert that exogenous amyloid fibrils act as templates and change the
conformation of endogenous amyloid protein to polymerize into amyloid
fibrils.” ^^^ Top ^^^

