![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Menopause and its causes**  

When I was in graduate school at the University of Oregon, everyone in our lab
was working on the problem of reproductive aging. Previously, people in the
lab had established that the ovaries didn't "run out of eggs." There was never
really any basis for that ridiculous belief. Many people just said it, the way
they said "old eggs" (but never old sperms) were responsible for birth
defects, or that "estrogen is the female hormone," a deficiency of which is
the cause of menopausal infertility. (Old sperms have been implicated in some
birth defects **.** People who are newly married, for example, were found to
have children with fewer birth defects than people of the same age who had
been married a long time, suggesting that more frequent intercourse involves
fresher sperms.) When ovaries have been treated with x-rays to destroy their
ability to ovulate, they have been found to produce more estrogen than before.
Ovulation is one thing, and the production of hormones is another thing. You
can't determine whether ovulation has occurred by measuring the hormones.

Knowing the large amount of work that has gone into our understanding of the
age-related decline in fertility, it is disturbing to see people on television
and in popular health books saying that menopause occurs when the "ovaries run
out of eggs."

Around 1970, many people were saying that aging was caused by the loss of
brain cells. There is a glimmer of truth in that silly idea, just as there
would be in saying that "aging is caused by the death of skin cells," making
the skin thinner and drier and less elastic. Both the brain and the skin are
sources of steroid hormones, and it is possible that the death of skin cells
and neurons is one factor in the age-related decline in the "sex steroids." An
organism would be an easier thing to understand if cells just did their job
for a certain period of time, and then died. A man named Hayflick has given
people some publications to cite, when they want to simplify things by saying
that aging occurs when cells have used up their quota of 50 divisions, but
there are many more studies that clearly show that Hayflick's limit is nothing
but a product of the cells' environment. The cell's environment, the signals
and substances and energy it receives, is complex, but real progress is being
made in understanding the things involved in the aging process. Luckily, the
infinite complexity of the environment is channeled into an understandable
array of processes by the cell's systematic ways of responding.

I knew, from talking with L. C. Strong,1 that early reproductive maturity was
associated with early death; in his strains of cancer-prone mice, he showed
that high estrogen was the cause of early puberty, a high cancer incidence,
and a relatively short life. D. A. Snowdon, et al., showed that the occurrence
of menopause at an early age in women is associated with a greater risk of
death from all causes, including strokes and coronary heart disease.2 (They
saw ovarian aging as an indicator of general aging.) P. W. F. Wilson, et al.,
reported that postmenopausal estrogen use was associated with an increased
incidence of heart disease and stroke.3 P. M. Wise showed that estrogen
accelerates aging of the central nervous system, destroying the nerves which
regulate the pituitary gonadotropins, and causing ovarian failure and
infertility.4 Many other studies of particular tissues show that estrogen
accelerates the rate of aging.

In my work with hamsters, I found that the infertility that developed at
middle age was caused by a high rate of oxygen consumption in the uterus,
causing the oxygen needed by the developing embryo to be consumed by uterine
tissues, and causing suffocation of the embryo. This is the central mechanism
by which the estrogen-containing contraceptives work **:** at any stage of
pregnancy, a sufficient dose of estrogen kills the embryo.

Polvani and Nencioni,5 among others, found that in women, the onset of
menopause (the first missed period, suddenly increased bone loss, nervous
symptoms such as depression, insomnia, and flushing) corresponds to the
failure to produce progesterone, while estrogen is produced at normal levels.
This results in a great functional excess of estrogen, because it is no longer
opposed by progesterone. Typically, it takes about four years for the monthly
estrogen excess to disappear. They suggested that the bone loss sets in
immediately when progesterone fails because cortisol then is able to dominate,
causing bone catabolism; progesterone normally protects against cortisol.
Other researchers have pointed out that estrogen dominance promotes mitosis of
the prolactin-secreting cells of the pituitary, and that prolactin causes
osteoporosis; by age 50, most people have some degree of tumefaction of the
prolactin-secreting part of the pituitary. But estrogen dominance (or
progesterone deficiency) also clearly obstructs thyroid secretion, and thyroid
governs the rate of bone metabolism and repair. Correcting the thyroid and
progesterone should take care of the cortisol/prolactin/osteo- porosis
problem.

P. M. Wise4 has demonstrated that the "menopausal" pituitary hormones, high
levels of LH and FSH, are produced because the regulatory nerves in the
hypothalamus have lost their sensitivity to estrogen, not because estrogen is
deficient. In fact, he showed that the nerves are desensitized precisely by
their cumulative exposure to estrogen. If an animal's ovaries are removed when
it is young, the regulatory nerves do not atrophy, and if ovaries are
transplanted into these animals at the normally infertile age, they are
fertile. But if animals are given larger doses of estrogen during youth, those
nerves atrophy prematurely, and they become prematurely infertile.

The mechanism by which estrogen desensitizes and kills brain cells is now
recognized as the "excitotoxic" process, in which the excitatory transmitter
glutamic acid is allowed to exhaust the nerve cells. (This explains the older
observations that glutamic acid, or aspartic acid, or aspartame, can cause
brain damage and reproductive failure.) Cortisol also activates the
excitotoxic system, in other brain cells, causing stress-induced atrophy of
those cells.6 Progesterone and pregnenolone are recognized as inhibitors of
this excitotoxic process.

Besides estrogen's promotion of excitotoxic cell death, leading to the failure
of the gonadotropin regulatory system, estrogen's stress-mimicking action
probably tends to increase the secretion of LH, in ways that can be corrected
by supplementing progesterone and thyroid. Since Selye's work, it has been
known that estrogen creates the same conditions as occur in the shock phase of
the stress reaction. (And shock, in a potential vicious circle, can increase
the level of estrogen.7) It has recently been demonstrated that estrogen
stimulates the adrenal glands, independently of the pituitary's ACTH. This can
increase the production of adrenal androgens, leading to hirsutism, and other
male traits, including anabolic effects.8

It was established in the 1950s that estrogen "erases" memories in well
trained animals. I suppose that acute effect is related to the chronic
toxicity that leads to cell death. (In the 1940s, DES was sold to prevent
miscarriages, though it was already known that it caused them **;** then there
was the argument that it slowed aging of the skin, despite the Revlon studies
at the University of Pennsylvania showing that it accelerates all aspects of
skin aging **;** lately there has been talk of promoting estrogen to improve
memory **.** )

Estrogen's nerve-exciting action is known to lower seizure thresholds **;**
premenstrual epilepsy is probably another acute sign of the neurotoxicity of
estrogen.

When fatigue and lethargy are associated with aging, the brain stimulating
action of estrogen can make a woman feel that she has more energy **.** (Large
doses given to rats will make them run compulsively **;** running wheels with
odometers have shown that they will run over 30 miles a day from the influence
of estrogen.) Estrogen inhibits one of the enzymic routes for inactivating
brain amines, and so it has more general effects on the brain than just the
glutamate system. This generalized effect on brain amines is more like the
effects of cocaine or amphetamine. If that is a woman's basis for wanting to
use estrogen, a monoamine oxidase inhibitor would be safer.

The reason for the menopausal progesterone deficiency is a complex of stress-
related causes. Free-radicals (for example, from iron in the corpus luteum)
interfere with progesterone synthesis, as do prolactin, ACTH, estrogen,
cortisol, carotene, and an imbalance of gonadotropins. A deficiency of
thyroid, vitamin A, and LDL-cholesterol can also prevent the synthesis of
progesterone. Several of the things which cause early puberty and high
estrogen, also tend to work against progesterone synthesis. The effect of an
intra-uterine irritant is to signal the ovary to suppress progesterone
production, to prevent pregnancy while there is a problem in the uterus. The
logic by which ACTH suppresses progesterone synthesis is similar, to prevent
pregnancy during stress. Since progesterone and pregnenolone protect brain
cells against the excitotoxins, anything that chronically lowers the body's
progesterone level tends to accelerate the estrogen-induced excitotoxic death
of brain cells.

Since progesterone and pregnenolone protect brain cells against the
excitotoxins, anything that chronically lowers the body's progesterone level
tends to accelerate the estrogen-induced excitotoxic death of brain cells.

Chronic constipation, and anxiety which decreases blood circulation in the
intestine, can increase the liver's exposure to endotoxin. Endotoxin (like
intense physical activity) causes the estrogen concentration of the blood to
rise. Diets that speed intestinal peristalsis might be expected to postpone
menopause. Penicillin treatment, probably by lowering endotoxin production, is
known to decrease estrogen and cortisone, while increasing progesterone. The
same effect can be achieved by eating raw carrots (especially with coconut
oil/olive oil dressing) every day, to reduce the amount of bacterial toxins
absorbed, and to help in the excretion of estrogen. Finally, long hours of
daylight are known to increase progesterone production, and long hours of
darkness are stressful. Annually, our total hours of day and night are the
same regardless of latitude, but different ways of living, levels of
artificial illumination, etc., have a strong influence on our hormones. In
some animal experiments, prolonged exposure to light has delayed some aspects
of aging.

General aging contributes to the specific changes that lead to menopause, but
the animal experiments show that fertility can be prolonged to a much greater
age by preventing excitotoxic exhaustion of the hypothalamic nerves. The
question that still needs to be more clearly answered is, to what extent can
general aging be prevented or delayed by protecting against the excitotoxins?
Minimizing estrogen (and cortisone) with optimal thyroid activity, and
maximizing pregnenolone and progesterone to prevent excitotoxic cell fatigue,
can be done easily. A diet low in iron and unsaturated fats protects the
respiratory apparatus from the damaging effects of excessive excitation, and--
since pregnenolone is formed in the mitochondrion--also helps to prevent the
loss of these hormones.  

**Copyright: Raymond Peat, PhD 1997**

**REFERENCES**  

1\. L. C. Strong, Biological Aspects of Cancer and Aging, Pergamon Press,
1968.

2\. D. A. Snowdon, et al., "Is early natural menopause a biologic marker of
health and aging? Am. J. Public Health 79, 709-714, 1989.  

3\. P. W. F. Wilson, et al. [The Framingham Study], N. E. J. M. 313(17),
1038-1043, 1985  

4\. P. M. Wise, "Influence of estrogen on aging of the central nervous system:
Its role in declining female reproductive function," in Menopause: Evaluation,
Treatment, and Health Concerns, pages 53-70, 1989.  

5\. Nencioni, T., and F. Polvani, Calcitonin, p. 297-305, A. Pecile, editor,
Elsevier, N.Y., 1985.

6\. T. I. Belova, "Structural damage to the mesencephalic reticular formation
induced by immobilization stress," Bull. Exp. Biol. & Med. 108(7), 126030,
1989.  

7\. F. Fourrier, et al., "Sex steroid hormones in circulatory shock, sepsis
syndrome, and septic shock," Circ. Shock 43(4), 171-178, 1994.  

8\. E. C. Ditkoff, et al., "The impact of estrogen on adrenal androgen
sensitivity and secretion in polycystic ovary syndrome," J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 80(2), 603-607, 1995.  

9\. C. Bain, et al., "Use of postmenopausal hormones and risk of myocardial
infarction," Circulation 64, 42-46, 1981.  

10\. T. L. Bush, et al., "Estrogen use and all-cause mortality: Preliminary
results from the Lipid Research Clinics Program follow-up study," JAMA 249,
903-906, 1983.

11\. M. S. Hunter and K. L. M. Liao, "Intentions to use hormone replacement
therapy in a community sample of 45-year-old women," Maturitas 20(1), 13-23,
1994. (Women who expressed an intention to use hormone replacement therapy at
menopause reported significantly lower self-esteem, more depressed mood,
anxiety, and negative attitudes toward menopause. The also expressed stronger
beliefs in their doctors' ability--as opposed to their own--to control their
menopause experience.)

12\. L. Dennerstein, et al., "Psychological well-being, mid-life and the
menopause," Maturitas 20(1), 1-11, 1994.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

