![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Milk in context: allergies, ecology, and some myths**  

Food allergies are becoming much more common in recent decades, especially in
industrialized countries. Most attention has been given to theories about
changes in people, such as the reduction in infectious diseases and parasites,
or vitamin D deficiency, or harmful effects from vaccinations, and little
attention has been given to degradation of the food supply.

Our food cultures, like linguistic and moral cultures, give us some
assumptions or theories about the way the world should be, and if these
beliefs aren't questioned and tested, they can permeate the culture of
science, turning the research process into a rationalization of accepted
opinions.

In general, those who pay for research are those with an investment in or
commitment to the preservation and expansion of the existing systems of
production and distribution. Cheap mass production, durability and long shelf-
life are more important than the effects of foods on health. The biggest
industries are usually able to keep public attention away from the harm they
do.

The historical economic importance of cereals and beans is reflected in the
nutritional and biochemical research literature, which has paid relatively
little attention to basic questions about human adaptation to the ecosystems.
From the early petrochemical Green Revolution to the contemporary imposition
of genetically altered seeds, the accumulated economic power of the food
industry has taken control of the food culture.

In evaluating each research publication relating to nutrition and health, we
should ask what alternative possibilities are being neglected, for practical
reasons, cultural preferences, and business interests.

Some people with an ecological concern have argued that grains and beans can
most economically provide the proteins and calories that people need, but good
nutrition involves much more than the essential nutrients.

Efficient industrial agriculture has been concerned with cheaply producing
those important nutrients, and their critics have focussed on their use of
toxic chemicals, on the social damage they produce, the degradation of the
soil, the toxic effects of genetic modification, their unsustainable use of
petroleum, and occasionally on the lower nutritional value of chemically
stimulated crops.

I think far too little attention is being given to the effects of abnormal and
stressful growth conditions on the plants' natural defense systems. Plants
normally synthesize some toxins and inhibitors of digestive enzymes to
discourage attacks by bacteria, fungi, insects, and other predators. When a
plant is injured or otherwise stressed, it produces more of the defensive
substances, and very often they communicate their stress to other plants, and
the resulting physiological changes can cause changes in seeds that affect the
resistance of the progeny. (Agrawal, 2001)

One of many substances produced by plants in response to injury is chitinase,
an enzyme that breaks down chitin, a polysaccharide that is a structural
component of fungi and insects. Chitinase, which is produced by bacteria and
humans, as well as by plants and other organisms, is involved in developmental
processes as well as in the innate immune system. In plants, the enzyme is
induced by ethylene and salicylate, in animals by estrogen, light damage, and
infections, and can be demonstrated in polyps and cancers.

The two main classes of plant allergens are the stress-induced chitinases, and
seed storage proteins, such as gluten. The chitinase allergens are responsible
for reactions to latex (which is secreted by rubber trees in reaction to a
wound), bananas, avocados, many other fruits and vegetables, and some types of
wood and other plant materials. Intensive agricultural methods are increasing
the formation of the defensive chemicals, and the industrialized crops are
responsible for the great majority of the new allergies that have appeared in
the last 30 years.

The presence of the chitinase family of proteins in humans was first
discovered in the inflamed asthmatic lung. It was then found at high levels in
the uterine endometrium at the time of implantation of the embryo (an
inflammation-like situation) and in the uterus during premature labor. Since
estrogen treatment is known to increase the incidence of asthma and other
inflammations, the appearance of chitinase also in the uterus in estrogen
dominated conditions is interesting, especially when the role of estrogen in
celiac disease (in effect an allergy to gluten) is considered. Celiac disease
is more prevalent among females, and it involves the immunological cross-
reaction to an antigen in the estrogen-regulated transglutaminase enzyme and
the gluten protein. The (calcium-regulated) transglutaminase enzyme is
involved in the cross-linking of proteins in keratinized cells, in fibrotic
processes in the liver, and in cancer. (People with celiac disease often
suffer from osteoporosis and urinary stone deposition, showing a general
problem with calcium regulation.)

This means that estrogen and stress cause the appearance of antigens in the
human or animal tissues that are essentially the same as the stress-induced
and defensive proteins in plant tissues. A crocodile might experience the same
sort of allergic reaction when eating estrogen-treated women and when eating
commercial bananas.

The various states of the innate immune system have been neglected by
immunologists, for example in relation to organ transplantation. The major
histocompatibility antigens are matched, but organ transplants still
sometimes fail. A study found that the livers from young men had a high
survival rate when transplanted into either men or women, but the livers of
older women donors were rejected at a high rate when transplanted into either
men or women. Exposure to estrogen increases intracellular calcium and the
unsaturation of fatty acids in tissue lipids, and the expression of enzymes
such as chitinase and transglutaminase, and the various enzymes in the
structure-sensitive estrogen-controlled metabolic pathways.

Estrogen's actions are closely and pervasively involved with the regulation of
calcium, and these changes affect the basic tissue structures and processes
that constitute the innate immune system. Estrogen's effect in increasing
susceptibility to autoimmune diseases hasn't yet been recognized by
mainstream medicine.  

The chemist Norman Pirie argued convincingly that leaf protein had much higher
nutritional value than grain and bean proteins, and that it had the potential
to be much more efficient economically, if it could be separated from the less
desirable components of leaves.

The amino acid composition and nutritional value of leaf protein is similar to
milk protein, which is understandable since cows produce milk from the amino
acids produced in their rumens by bacteria digesting the leaves the cows have
eaten. The bacteria perform the refining processes that Pirie believed could
be done technologically, and they also degrade or detoxify the major toxins
and allergens.

The nutrients produced in the cow's rumen are selectively absorbed into the
cow's bloodstream, where the liver can further filter out any toxins before
the amino acids and other nutrients are absorbed by the udder to be
synthesized into milk. If cows are fed extremely bad diets, for example with a
very large amount of grain, the filtering process is less perfect, and some
allergens can reach the milk, but since sick cows are less profitable than
healthy cows, dairies usually feed their cows fairly well.

In a recent study of 69,796 hospitalized newborns, a diagnosis of cow's milk
allergy was made in 0.21% of them. Among those whose birthweight had been less
than a kilogram, 0.35% of them were diagnosed with the milk allergy.
Gastrointestinal symptoms were the main reason for the diagnosis, but a
challenge test to confirm the diagnosis was used in only 15% of the
participating hospitals, and a lymphocyte stimulation test was used in only
5.5% of them (Miyazawa, et al., 2009). There are many publications about milk
allergies, but they generally involve a small group of patients, and the tests
they use are rarely evaluated on healthy control subjects.

Several surveys have found that of children who have a diagnosed milk allergy,
about 2/3 of them grow out of the allergy.

People who have told me that they have had digestive problems with milk have
sometimes found that a different brand of milk doesn't cause any problem.

Milk with reduced fat content is required by US law to have vitamins D and A
added. The vehicle used in the vitamin preparation, and the industrial
contaminants in the pure vitamins themselves, are possible sources of
allergens in commercial milk, so whole milk is the most likely to be free of
allergens.

A thickening agent commonly used in milk products, carrageenan, is a powerful
allergen that can cause a pseudo-latex allergy (Tarlo, et al., 1995). It is
a sulfated polysaccharide, structurally similar to heparin. There are good
reasons to think that its toxic effects are the result of disturbance of
calcium metabolism (see for example Abdullahi, et al., 1975; Halici, et al.,
2008; Janaswamy and Chandrasekaran, 2008).

Besides the idea of milk allergy, the most common reason for avoiding milk is
the belief that the genes of some ethnic groups cause them to lack the enzyme,
lactase, needed to digest milk sugar, lactose, and that this causes lactose
intolerance, resulting in gas or diarrhea when milk is consumed. Tests have
been reported in which a glass of milk will cause the lactase deficient people
to have abdominal pain. However, when intolerant people have been tested,
using milk without lactose for comparison, there were no differences between
those receiving milk with lactose or without it. The intolerant people
consistently tolerate having a glass with each meal.

When a group of lactase deficient people have been given some milk every day
for a few weeks, they have adapted, for example with tests showing that much
less hydrogen gas was produced from lactose by intestinal bacteria after they
had adapted (Pribila, et al., 2000).

Bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine can be caused by hypothyroidism
(Lauritano, et al., 2007), and the substances produced by these bacteria can
damage the lining of the small intestine, causing the loss of lactase enzymes
(Walshe, et al., 1990).

Another hormonal condition that probably contributes to lactase deficiency is
progesterone deficiency, since a synthetic progestin has been found to
increase the enzyme (Nagpaul, et al., 1990). The particular progestin they
used lacks many of progesterone's effects, but it does protect against some
kinds of stress, including high estrogen and cortisol. This suggests that
stress, with its increased ratio of estrogen and cortisol to progesterone,
might commonly cause the enzyme to decrease.

Two other ideas that sometimes cause people to avoid drinking milk and eating
cheese are that they are fattening foods, and that the high calcium content
could contribute to hardening of the arteries.

When I traveled around Europe in 1968, I noticed that milk and cheese were
hard to find in the Slavic countries, and that many people were fat. When I
crossed from Russia into Finland, I noticed there were many stores selling a
variety of cheeses, and the people were generally slender. When I lived in
Mexico in the 1960s, good milk was hard to find in the cities and towns, and
most women had fat hips and short legs. Twenty years later, when good milk was
available in all the cites, there were many more slender women, and the young
people on average had much longer legs. The changes I noticed there reminded
me of the differences I had seen between Moscow and Helsinki, and I suspect
that the differences in calcium intake were partly responsible for the changes
of physique.

In recent years there have been studies showing that regular milk drinkers are
less fat than people who don't drink it. Although the high quality protein and
saturated fat undoubtedly contribute to milk's anti-obesity effect, the high
calcium content is probably the main factor.

The parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an important regulator of calcium metabolism.
If dietary calcium isn't sufficient, causing blood calcium to decrease, the
PTH increases, and removes calcium from bones to maintain a normal amount in
the blood. PTH has many other effects, contributing to inflammation,
calcification of soft tissues, and decreased respiratory energy production.

When there is adequate calcium, vitamin D, and magnesium in the diet, PTH is
kept to a minimum. When PTH is kept low, cells increase their formation of the
uncoupling proteins, that cause mitochondria to use energy at a higher rate,
and this is associated with decreased activity of the fatty acid synthase
enzymes.

These changes are clearly related to the anti-obesity effect of calcium, but
those enzymes are important for many other problems.

The metabolic syndrome, that involves diabetes, hypertension, and obesity,
is associated with high PTH (Ahlström, et al., 2009; Hjelmesaeth, et al.,
2009).

Alzheimer's disease involves decreased mitochondrial activity and low levels
of the uncoupling proteins. There is evidence that milk drinkers are protected
against dementia (Yamada, et al., 2003). Cancer involves increased activity of
the fatty acid synthase enzymes. Increased calcium consumption beneficially
affects both sets of enzymes, uncoupling proteins and fatty acid synthase.

Multiple sclerosis relapses consistently occur at times of high PTH, and
remissions consistently occur at times of low PTH (Soilu-Hänninen, et al.,
3008). PTH increases the activity of nitric oxide synthase, and nitric oxide
is a factor in the vascular leakiness that is so important in MS.

There are components of milk that might protect against tooth decay by
inhibiting the binding of bacteria to teeth (Danielsson, et al., 2009).

David McCarron has published a large amount of evidence showing how calcium
deficiency contributes to high blood pressure. The chronic elevation of PTH
caused by calcium deficiency causes the heart and blood vessels to retain
calcium, making them unable to relax fully.

Intravenous infusion of calcium can relax blood vessels and improve heart
function. The suppression of PTH is probably the main mechanism.

PTH (like estrogen) causes mast cells to release promoters of inflammation,
including histamine and serotonin. Serotonin and nitric oxide contribute to
increasing PTH secretion.

Removal of the parathyroid gland has reduced heart problems and mortality
(Costa-Hong, et al., 2007) and insomnia (Esposito, et al., 2008; Sabbatini, et
al., 2002) in people with kidney disease and excess PTH.

Increased carbon dioxide, for example when adapted to high altitude, can
greatly decrease PTH. Frequent, but smaller, meals can reduce PTH.

Cancer cells often secrete PTH and related proteins with similar effects on
calcium, and the PTH stimulates the growth and invasiveness of prostate cancer
(DaSilva, et al., 2009) cells, and seems to be as closely involved with breast
cancer. The PTH-related protein is associated with calcification in breast
cancer (Kanbara, et al., 1994). Microscopic calcium crystals themselve produce
inflammation (Denko and Whitehouse, 1976).

Besides being an ecologically favorable source of calcium, protein, sugar, and
fat, the composition of milk causes it to be digested efficiently, supporting
the growth of bacteria that are relatively safe for the intestine and liver,
and reducing the absorption of endotoxin.

Dividing any food into smaller meals can lower the PTH, and milk is a
convenient food to use in small amounts and frequently.

Some amino acids directly stimulate insulin secretion, decreasing blood sugar
and leading to the secretion of cortisol in reaction to the depression of
blood glucose. The presence of lactose in milk, and of fat, to slow absorption
of the amino acids, helps to minimize the secretion of cortisol. The main
protein of milk, casein, seems to have some direct antistress effects (Biswas,
et al., 2003).

Since milk's primary biological function is to support the growth of a young
animal, some of its features make it inappropriate as a sole food for an
adult. To support cell division and growth, the methionine and tryptophan
content of milk is higher than would be optimal for an adult animal, and the
phosphate might be slightly more than needed, in relation to the calcium.
Since the fetus stores a large amount of iron during gestation, the iron
content of milk is low, and when a young animal has used the stored iron, its
continuing growth requires more iron than milk provides. However, for an
adult, the low iron content of milk and cheese makes these foods useful for
preventing the iron overload that often contributes to the degenerative
diseases.

Combining milk and cheese with fruits adds to the antistress effect. The
additional sugar and potassium and other minerals allow the milk protein to be
used more efficiently, by moderating the secretion of cortisol, and helping to
inhibit the secretion of PTH.

Substances such as PTH, nitric oxide, serotonin, cortisol, aldosterone,
estrogen, thyroid stimulating hormone, and prolactin have regulatory and
adaptive functions that are essential, but that ideally should act only
intermittently, producing changes that are needed momentarily. When the
environment is too stressful, or when nutrition isn't adequate, the organism
may be unable to mobilize the opposing and complementary substances to stop
their actions. In those situations, it can be therapeutic to use some of the
nutrients as supplements. Calcium carbonate (eggshell or oyster shell, for
example) and vitamins D and K, can sometimes produce quick antistress effects,
alleviating insomnia, hypertension, edema, inflammations and allergies, etc.,
but the regular use of milk and cheese can prevent many chronic stress-related
diseases.

REFERENCES

Agents Actions. 1975 Oct;5(4):371-3. **Effect of calcitonin on carrageenan
foot oedema.** Abdullahi SE, De Bastiani G, Nogarin L, Velo GP.

Am Nat. 2001 May;157(5):555-69. **Transgenerational consequences of plant
responses to herbivory: an adaptive maternal effect?** Agrawal AA.

Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009 Nov;71(5):673-8. **Correlation between plasma
calcium, parathyroid hormone (PTH) and the metabolic syndrome (MetS) in a
community-based cohort of men and women.** Ahlström T, Hagström E, Larsson A,
Rudberg C, Lind L, Hellman P.

Indian J Exp Biol. 2003 Apr;41(4):367-9. **Protection of adrenocortical
activity by dietary casein in ether anaesthetized rats.** Biswas NM,
Chattopadhyay A, Sarkar M. Ether anaesthesia to 20% casein fed rats caused no
change in adrenal delta5-3beta-HSD activity and serum corticosterone level
when compared with controls fed 20% casein diet. **The results suggest that
high milk protein diet may prevent acute stress effects by protecting
adrenocortical activity.** The present investigation opens up a new area of
management of stress.

Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Oct;88(4):877-85. **Dairy calcium supplementation in
overweight or obese persons: its effect on markers of fat metabolism.**
Bortolotti M, Rudelle S, Schneiter P, Vidal H, Loizon E, Tappy L, Acheson KJ.

J Am Coll Nutr. 2005 Dec;24(6 Suppl):569S-73S. **The myth of increased lactose
intolerance in African-Americans.** Byers KG, Savaiano DA.

Exp Eye Res. 2004 Aug;79(2):239-47. **Light damage induced changes in mouse
retinal gene expression.** Chen L, Wu W, Dentchev T, Zeng Y, Wang J, Tsui I,
Tobias JW, Bennett J, Baldwin D, Dunaief JL.

J Urol. 2008 Sep;180(3):974-9. Epub 2008 Jul 17. **Urinary stone disease in
adults with celiac disease: prevalence, incidence and urinary determinants.**
Ciacci C, Spagnuolo G, Tortora R, Bucci C, Franzese D, Zingone F, Cirillo M.

Surgery. 2007 Nov;142(5):699-703. **Parathyroidectomy reduces cardiovascular
events and mortality in renal Hyperparathyroidism.** Costa-Hong V, Jorgetti V,
Gowdak LH, Moyses RM, Krieger EM, De Lima JJ.

Caries Res. 2009;43(3):171-8. **Human milk compounds inhibiting adhesion of
mutans streptococci to host ligand-coated hydroxyapatite in vitro.**
Danielsson Niemi L, Hernell O, Johansson I.

Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;69(18):7402-11. **The neuroendocrine-derived peptide
parathyroid hormone-related protein promotes prostate cancer cell growth by
stabilizing the androgen receptor.** DaSilva J, Gioeli D, Weber MJ, Parsons
SJ.

J Rheumatol. 1976 Mar;3(1):54-62. **Experimental inflammation induced by
naturally occurring microcrystalline calcium salts.** Denko CW, Whitehouse MW.

Dig Liver Dis. 2009 Aug;41(8):541-50. **Transglutaminases in inflammation and
fibrosis of the gastrointestinal tract and the liver.** Elli L, Bergamini CM,
Bardella MT, Schuppan D.

J Nephrol. 2008 Mar-Apr;21 Suppl 13:S92-6. **Parathyroidectomy improves the
quality of sleep in maintenance hemodialysis patients with severe
hyperparathyroidism.** Esposito MG, Cesare CM, De Santo RM, Cice G, Perna AF,
Violetti E, Conzo G, Bilancio G, Celsi S, Annunziata F, Iannelli S, De Santo
NG, Cirillo M, Livrea A.

Endocrinology. 1997 Jul;138(7):2665-73. **Parathyroid hormone-related protein
is induced in the adult liver during endotoxemia and stimulates the hepatic
acute phase response.** Funk JL, Moser AH, Grunfeld C, Feingold KR.

Arch Pharm Res. 2008 Jul;31(7):891-9. **Effects of calcium channel blockers on
hyaluronidase-induced capillary vascular permeability.** Halici Z, Suleyman H,
Cadirci E.

J Am Diet Assoc. 2000 May;100(5):524-8. **Improved lactose digestion and
intolerance among African-American adolescent girls fed a dairy-rich diet.**
Pribila BA, Hertzler SR, Martin BR, Weaver CM, Savaiano DA.

Dig Dis Sci. 1998 Jan;43(1):39-40. **Fecal hydrogen production and consumption
measurements. Response to daily lactose ingestion by lactose maldigesters.**
Hertzler SR, Savaiano DA, Levitt MD.

J Am Coll Nutr. 2009 Apr;28(2):142-9. **Effects of dairy products on
intracellular calcium and blood pressure in adults with essential
hypertension.** Hilpert KF, West SG, Bagshaw DM, Fishell V, Barnhart L,
Lefevre M, Most MM, Zemel MB, Chow M, Hinderliter AL, Kris-Etherton PM.
Consumption of dairy foods beneficially affects (Ca)(i), resulting in
improved BP in a subgroup defined by (Ca)(i) response.

Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2009 Feb 3;8:7. **Parathyroid hormone, but not vitamin D,
is associated with the metabolic syndrome in morbidly obese women and men: a
cross-sectional study.** Hjelmesaeth J, Hofsø D, Aasheim ET, Jenssen T, Moan
J, Hager H, Røislien J, Bollerslev J.

Eur J Epidemiol. 2003;18(7):677-84. **The Swedish coeliac disease epidemic
with a prevailing twofold higher risk in girls compared to boys may reflect
gender specific risk factors.** Ivarsson A, Persson LA, Nyström L, Hernell O.

Carbohydr Res. 2008 Feb 4;343(2):364-73. Epub 2007 Oct 30. **Heterogeneity in
iota-carrageenan molecular structure: insights for polymorph II-- >III
transition in the presence of calcium ions.** Janaswamy S, Chandrasekaran R.

Metabolism. 2002 Oct;51(10):1230-4. **A calcium-deficient diet caused
decreased bone mineral density and secondary elevation of estrogen in aged
male rats-effect of menatetrenone and elcatonin.** Kato S, Mano T, Kobayashi
T, Yamazaki N, Himeno Y, Yamamoto K, Itoh M, Harada N, Nagasaka A.

Nippon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1993 Apr;94(4):394-9. **[Immunohistological
evaluation of parathyroid hormone-related protein in breast cancer with and
without calcification on mammography]** Kanbara Y, Kono N, Nakaya M, Ishikawa
Y, Fujiwara O, Kitazawa R, Kitazawa S.

J Pak Med Assoc. 1996 Jun;46(6):128-31. **Changes in plasma electrolytes
during acclimatization at high altitude.** Khan DA, Aslam M, Khan ZU.

J Am Coll Nutr. 2009 Feb;28 Suppl 1:103S-19S. **Milk products, dietary
patterns and blood pressure management.** Kris-Etherton PM, Grieger JA,
Hilpert KF, West SG.

Br J Cancer. 1996 Jul;74(2):200-7. **A new human breast cancer cell line,
KPL-3C, secretes parathyroid hormone-related protein and produces tumours
associated with microcalcifications in nude mice.** Kurebayashi J, Kurosumi M,
Sonoo H.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Nov;92(11):4180-4. **Association between
hypothyroidism and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.** Lauritano EC,
Bilotta AL, Gabrielli M, Scarpellini E, Lupascu A, Laginestra A, Novi M,
Sottili S, Serricchio M, Cammarota G, Gasbarrini G, Pontecorvi A, Gasbarrini
A.

Bone. 2009 Oct 6. **Bone involvement in clusters of autoimmune diseases: Just
a complication?** Lombardi F, Franzese A, Iafusco D, Del Puente A, Esposito A,
Prisco F, Troncone R, Valerio G.

Hypertension 1980 Mar-Apr;2(2):162-8. **Enhanced parathyroid function in
essential hypertension: a homeostatic response to a urinary calcium leak.**
McCarron DA, Pingree PA, Rubin RJ, Gaucher SM, Molitch M, Krutzik S. **Recent
reports . . . suggest that increased parathyroid gland function may be one of
the more common endocrine disturbances associated with hypertension.**
Compared to a second age- and sex-matched normotensive population **, the
hypertensives demonstrated a significant (p less than 0.005) relative
hypercalciuria. For any level of urinary sodium, hypertensives excreted more
calcium.** These preliminary data suggest that parathyroid gland function may
be enhanced in essential hypertension.

Am J Med 1987 Jan 26;82(1B):27-33. **The calcium paradox of essential
hypertension.** McCarron DA, Morris CD, Bukoski R. This evidence, and the
paradoxical therapeutic efficacy of both calcium channel blockers and
supplemental dietary calcium, can be integrated into a single theoretic
construct.

Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2002 Oct;17(10):1854. **Insomnia in maintenance
haemodialysis patients.** Sabbatini M, Minale B, Crispo A, Pisani A, Ragosta
A, Esposito R, Cesaro A, Cianciaruso B, Andreucci VE.

J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Feb;79(2):152-7. **A longitudinal study of
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and intact parathyroid hormone levels indicate the
importance of vitamin D and calcium homeostasis regulation in multiple
sclerosis.** Soilu-Hänninen M, Laaksonen M, Laitinen I, Erälinna JP, Lilius
EM, Mononen I.

J Nutr. 2006 Apr;136(4):1107-13. **Lactose intolerance symptoms assessed by
meta-analysis: a grain of truth that leads to exaggeration.** Savaiano DA,
Boushey CJ, McCabe GP.

J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1995 May; 95(5 Pt 1): 933-6. **Anaphylaxis to
carrageenan: a pseudo-latex allergy.** Tarlo, S M Dolovich, J Listgarten, C

Gut. 1990 Jul;31(7):770-6. **Effects of an enteric anaerobic bacterial culture
supernatant and deoxycholate on intestinal calcium absorption and
disaccharidase activity.** Walshe K, Healy MJ, Speekenbrink AB, Keane CT, Weir
DG, O'Moore RR.

Metabolism. 2003 Aug;52(8):1072-7. **Dietary sodium restriction exacerbates
age-related changes in rat adipose tissue and liver lipogenesis**. Xavier AR,
Garofalo MA, Migliorini RH, Kettelhut IC.

Hypertension 1994 Apr;23(4):513-30. **Dietary calcium and blood pressure in
experimental models of hypertension. A review.** Hatton DC, McCarron DA.

Nippon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1993 Apr;94(4):394-9. **[Immunohistological
evaluation of parathyroid hormone-related protein in breast cancer with and
without calcification on mammography]** [Article in Japanese] Kanbara Y, Kono
N, Nakaya M, Ishikawa Y, Fujiwara O, Kitazawa R, Kitazawa S. It is suspected
that PTHrP is also one of the main factors of calcification in breast cancer.

Kokuritsu Iyakuhin Shokuhin Eisei Kenkyusho Hokoku. 1998;(116):46-62. **[Plant
defense-related proteins as latex allergens]** [Article in Japanese] Yagami T.

J Am Geriatr Soc 2003 Mar;51(3):410-4. **Association between dementia and
midlife risk factors: the Radiation Effects Research Foundation Adult Health
Study.** Yamada M, Kasagi F, Sasaki H, Masunari N, Mimori Y, Suzuki G.

Am J Hypertens 1995 Oct;8(10 Pt 1):957-64. **Regulation of parathyroid hormone
and vitamin D in essential hypertension.** Young EW, Morris CD, Holcomb S,
McMillan G, McCarron DA. The maximal stimulated PTH level was significantly
higher in hypertensive than normotensive subjects in the absence of measured
differences in serum ionized calcium concentration, serum 1,25(OH)2-vitamin D
concentration, and creatinine clearance.

Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(8):1977-85. **Estradiol activates mast cells via a
non-genomic estrogen receptor-alpha and calcium influx.** Zaitsu M, Narita S,
Lambert KC, Grady JJ, Estes DM, Curran EM, Brooks EG, Watson CS, Goldblum RM,
Midoro-Horiuti T.

Copyright 2011. Raymond Peat, P.O. Box 5764, Eugene OR 97405. All Rights
Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
Not for republication without written permission.  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

