![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Mitonchondria and mortality:**

Diet, exercise, and medicine, damaging or repairing respiratory metabolism

**_MAIN IDEAS AND CONTEXTS_**

**_Lactic acid and carbon dioxide_** _have opposing effects._

**_Intense exercise damages cells_** _in ways that cumulatively impair
metabolism. There is clear evidence that glycolysis, producing lactic acid
from glucose, has toxic effects, suppressing respiration and killing cells.
Within five minutes, exercise lowers the activity of enzymes that oxidize
glucose. Diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, and general aging involve increased
lactic acid production and accumulated metabolic (mitochondrial) damage._

**_The products of glycolysis,_** _lactic acid and pyruvic acid, suppress
oxidation of glucose._

__**_Adaptation_** _to hypoxia or increased carbon dioxide limits the
formation of lactic acid. Muscles are 50% more efficient in the adapted state;
glucose, which forms more carbon dioxide than fat does when oxidized,, is
metabolized more efficiently than fats, requiring less oxygen._

**_Lactic acidosis,_** _by suppressing oxidation of glucose, increases
oxidation of fats, further suppressing glucose oxidation._

**_Estrogen_** _is harmful to mitochondria,_ ** _progesterone_** _is
beneficial._

**_Progesterone's brain-protective_** _and restorative effects involve
mitochondrial actions._

**_Thyroid hormone, palmitic acid, and light_** _activate a crucial
respiratory enzyme, suppressing the formation of lactic acid. Palmitic acid
occurs in coconut oit, and is formed naturally in animal tissues. Unsaturated
oils have the opposite effect._

**_Heart failure, shock,_** _and other problems involving excess lactic acid
can be treated "successfully" by poisoning glycolysis with dichloroacetic
acid, reducing the production of lactic acid, increasing the oxidation of
glucose, and increasing cellular ATP concentration. Thyroid, vitamin B1,
biotin, etc., do the same._

**_SOME DEFINITIONS_**

**_Glycolysis:_** _The conversion of glucose to lactic acid, providing some
usable energy, but many times less than oxidation provides._

**_Lactic acid,_** _produced by splitting glucose to pyruvic acid followed by
its reduction, is associated with calcium uptake and nitric oxide production,
depletes energy, contributing to cell death._

**_Crabtree effect:_** _Inhibition of cellular respiration by an excess of
glucose; excess of glucose promotes calcium uptake by cells._

**_Pasteur effect:_** _Inhibition of glycolysis (fermentation) by oxygen._

**_Randle effect:_** _The inhibition of the oxidation of glucose by an excess
of fatty acids. This lowers metabolic efficiency. Estrogen promotes this
effect._

__**_Lactated Ringer's solution:_** _A salt solution that has\ been used to
increase blood volume in treating shock; the lactate was apparently chosen as
a buffer in place of bicarbonate, as a matter of convenience rather than
physiology. This solution is toxic, partly because it contains the form of
lactate produced by bacteria, but our own lactate, at higher concentrations,
produces the same sorts of toxic effect, damaging mitochondria,_

**_Estrogenic phytotoxins_** _damage mitochondria, kill brain cells; tofu is
associated with dementia._

_===============_

Since reading Warburg's publications in the late 1960s and early 70s, and
doing my own research on tissue respiration, I have been convinced that Warbug
was on the right track in seeing mitochondrial respiration as the controlling
influence in cell differentiation, and in seeing cancer as a reversion to a
primitive form of life based on a "respiratory defect." Harry Rubin's studies
of cells in culture have expanded Warburg's picture of the process of
cancerization, showing that genetic changes occur only after the cells have
been transformed into cancer.

It is now well recognized that defective mitochondrial respiration is a
central factor in diseases of muscles, brain, liver, kidneys, and other
organs. The common view has been that the mitochondrial defects are produced
by genetic defects, that are either inherited or acquired, and are
irreversible.

Mitochondria depend on some genes in the nuclear chromosomes, but they also
contain some genes, and mutations in these specific mitochondrial genes have
been associated with various diseases, and with aging. Although these aren't
the genes that the cancer establishment has focussed on as "the cause" of
cancer, for people interested in the achievements of Warburg and Rubin, it is
important to know whether mutations in these mitochondrial genes are the
_cause_ of respiratory defects, or whether a respiratory defect causes the
mutations. Recent research seems to show that physiological problems precede
and cause the mutations.

Warburg believed that mitochondria supported specialized cell functions by
concentrating themselves in the places where energy is needed. This idea has
some interesting implications. For example, when the amount of thyroid hormone
is increased, or when the organism adapts to a high altitude, the number of
mitochondria increases. But in energy deficient states such as diabetes, they
don't. How are these crucial organelles called into existence by the hormone
that increases respiration and energy, and also by the hypoxic conditions of
high altitudes? In both of these conditions, the availability of oxygen is
limiting the ability to produce energy. In both conditions, carbon dioxide
concentration in tissue is higher, in one case, because thyroid stimulates its
production, in the other, because the Haldane effect limits its loss from the
lungs.

Could carbon dioxide, a major product of mitochondria, help to call
mitochondria into existence? My answer to this is "yes," and it will help to
briefly explain how I see mitochondria. Although I have no hesitancy in
accepting that organelles can be exchanged between species, and that it is
conceivable that mitochondria might have been derived from symbiotic bacteria,
I am reluctant to believe that something happens just because it _could_
happen. For example, Francis Crick proposed that life on earth originated when
genes arrived here on space dust from some other world. That's a theoretical
possibility, but what's the point? It just avoids explaining how the highly
organized material came into existence somewhere else, and it probably
seriously interfered with the consideration of the ways life could arise here.
Similarly, some people like to think that mitochondria and chloroplasts were
originally bacteria, that came into symbiosis with another kind of living
material, consisting of nucleus and cytoplasm. Like Crick's "space germs," it
can be argued that it's possible, but the problem is that this explanation can
stop people from thinking freshly about the nature of the various organelles,
and how they came to exist. (How did cells originate? How did mitochondria
originate? "Germs.")

Since I have a view of how cells came to exist, under conditions that exist on
earth, I should consider whether that view doesn't also reasonably account for
their various components. Sidney Fox's proteinoid microspheres provide a good
model for the spontaneous formation of primitive cells; variations of that
idea can account for the formation of organelles (such as mitochondria and
nuclei within cells, and chromosomes within nuclei). The value of this idea,
of a self-stimulating process in mitochondrial generation, is that it suggests
many ways to test the idea experimentally, and it suggests explanations for
developmental and pathological processes that otherwise would have no coherent
explanation.

Proteinoid microspheres and coacervates form by acquiring molecules from
solution, condensing them into a separate phase, with its own physical
properties. At every phase boundary, there are numerous physical forces,
especially electronic properties, that make each kind of interface different
from other kinds. Small changes of pH, temperature, of salts and other solutes
can alter the interfacial forces, causing particles to dissolve, or grow, or
fragment, or to move. In the way that carbon dioxide alters the shapes and
electrical affinities of hemoglobin and other proteins, I propose that it
increases the stability of the mitochondrial coacervate, causing it to
"recruit" additional proteins from its external environment, as well as from
its own synthetic machinery, to enlarge both its structure and its functions.

In the relative absence of carbon dioxide, or excess of alternative solutes
and adsorbents, such as lactic acid, the stability of the mitochondrial phase
would be decreased, and the mitochondria would be degraded in both structure
and function. As the back side of the idea that carbon dioxide stabilizes and
activates mitochondria, the idea that lactic acid is involved in the degrading
of mitochondria can also be tested experimentally, and it is already supported
by a considerable amount of circumstantial evidence.

This combination of sensitivity to the environment, with a kind of positive
feedback or inertia either upward or downward, corresponds to what we actually
see in mitochondrial physiology and pathology.

The Crabtree effect, which is the suppression of respiration by glycolysis, is
often described as the simple opposite of the Pasteur effect, in which
respiration limits glycolysis to the rate that allows its product to be
consumed oxidatively. But the Pasteur effect is a normal sort of control
system; when the Pasteur effect fails, as in cancer, there is glycolysis which
is relatively independent of respiration, causing sugar to be consumed
inefficiently. Embryonic tissues sometimes behave in this manner, leading to
the suggestion that glycolysis is closely related to growth. Unlike the
logical Pasteur effect, the Crabtree effect tends to lower cellular energy and
adaptability. Looking at many situations in which increasing the glucose
supply increases lactic acid production and suppresses respiration, leading to
maladaptive decrease in cellular energy, I have begun thinking of lactic acid
as a toxin. The use of Ringer's lactate solution in medicine has led many
people to assume that lactate must be beneficial, or they wouldn't put it in
the salt solution that is often used in emergiencies; however, I think its use
here, as a buffer, is simply a convenience, because of the instability of some
bicarbonate solutions.

On the organismic level, it is clear that lactic acid is "the essence of
hyperventilation," and that it produces edema and malfunction on a grand
scale: The panic reaction, shock lung, vascular leakiness, brain swelling, and
finally multiple organ failure, all can be traced to an excess of lactic acid,
and the related features of hyperventilated physiology.

Otto Warburg apparently thought of lactate as simply a sign of the respiratory
defect that characterizes cancer. V. S. Shapot at least hinted at its possible
role in turning on the catabolic reactions leading to cancer cachexia
(wasting). I think a good case can be made for lactate as the _cause_ of the
respiratory defect in cancer, just as it is usually the immediate cause of the
respiratory derangement of hyperventilation on the organismic level.

The Crabtree effect is usually thought of as just something that happens in
tumors, and some tissues that are very active glycolytically, and some
bacteria, when they are given large amounts of glucose. But when we consider
lactate, which is produced by normal tissues when they are deprived of oxygen
or are disturbed by a stress reaction, the Crabtree effect becomes a very
general thing. The "respiratory defect" that we can see on the organismic
level during hyperventilation, is very similar to the "systemic Crabtree
effect" that happens during stress, in which respiration is shut down while
glycolysis is activated. Since oxidative metabolism is many times more
efficient for producing energy than glycolysis is, it is maladaptive to shut
it down during stress.

Since the presence of lactate is so commonly considered to be a normal and
adaptive response to stress, the shut-down of respiration in the presence of
lactate is generally considered to be caused by something else, with lactate
being seen as an effect rather than a cause. Nitric oxide and calcium excess
have been identified as the main endogenous antirespiratory factors in stress,
though free unsaturated fatty acids are clearly involved, too. However,
glycolysis, and the products of glycolysis, lactate and pyruvate, have been
found to have a causal role in the suppression of respiration; it is both a
cause and a consequence of the respiratory shutdown, though nitric oxide,
calcium, and fatty acids are closely involved,

Since lactic acid is produced by the breakdown of glucose, a high level of
lactate in the blood means that a large amount of sugar is being consumed; in
response, the body mobilizes free fatty acids as an additional source of
energy. An increase of free fatty acids suppresses the oxidation of glucose.
(This is called the Randle effect, glucose-fatty acid cycle, substrate-
competition cycle, etc.) Women, with higher estrogen and growth hormone,
usually have more free fatty acids than men, and during exercise oxidize a
higher proportion of fatty acids than men do. This fatty acid exposure
"decreases glucose tolerance," and undoubtedly explains women's higher
incidence of diabetes. While most fatty acids inhibit the oxidation of glucose
without immediately inhibiting glycolysis, palmitic acid is unusual, in its
inhibition of glycolysis and lactate production without inhibitng oxidation. I
assume that this largely has to do with its important function in cardiolipin
and cytochrome oxidase.

Exercise, like aging, obesity, and diabetes, increases the levels of
circulating free fatty acids and lactate. But ordinary activity of an integral
sort, activates the systems in an organized way, increasing carbon dioxide and
circulation and efficiency. Different types of exercise have been identified
as destructive or reparative to the mitochondria; "concentric" muscular work
is said to be restorative to the mitochondria. As I understand it, this means
contraction with a load, and relaxation without a load. The heart's
contraction follows this principle, and this could explain the observation
that heart mitochondria don't change in the course of ordinary aging.

When a person has an accident, or surgery, and goes into shock, the degree of
lactic acidema is recognized as an indicator of the severity of the problem.
Lactated Ringer's solution has been commonly used to treat these people, to
restore their blood pressure. But when prompt treatment with lactated Ringer's
solution has been compared with no early treatment at all, the patients who
are not "rescuscitated" do better than those who got the early treatment. And
when Ringer's lactate has been compared with various other solutions,
synthetic starch solutions, synthetic hemoglobin polymer solution, or simply a
concentrated solution of sodium chloride, those who received the lactate
solution did least well. For example, of 8 animals treated with another
solution, 8 survived, while among 8 treated with Ringer's lactate, 6 died.

Mitochondrial metabolism is now being seen as the basic problem in aging and
several degenerative diseases. The tendency has been to see random genetic
deterioration as the driving force behind mitochondrial aging. Genetic repair
in mitochondria was assumed not to occur. However, recently two kinds of
genetic repair have been demonstrated. One in which the DNA strand is
repaired, and another, in which sound mitochondria are "recruited" to replace
the defective, mutated, "old" mitochondria.

In ordinary nuclear chromosomal genes, DNA repair is well known. The other
kind of repair, in which unmutated cells replace the. genetically damaged
cells, has been commonly observed in the skin of the face: During intense sun
exposure, mutant cells accumulate; but after a period in which the skin hasn't
been exposed to the damaging radiation, the skin is made up of healthy "young"
cells.

In the way that the skin can be seen to recover from genetic damage, that had
been considered to be permanent and cumulative, simply by avoiding the
damaging factor, mitochondrial aging is coming to be seen as both avoidable
and repairable.

The stressful conditions that physiologically harm mitochondria are now being
seen as the probable cause for the mitochondrial genetic defects that
accumulate with aging. Stressful exercise, which has been known to cause
breakage of the nuclear chromosomes, is now seen to damage mitochondrial
genes, too. Providing energy, while reducing stress, seems to be all it takes
to reverse the accumulated mitochondrial genetic damage.

Fewer mitochondrial problems will be considered to be inherited, as we develop
an integral view of the ways in which mitochondrial physiology is disrupted.
Palmitic acid, which is a major component of the cardiolipin which regulates
the main respiratory enzyme, becomes displaced by polyunsaturated fats as
aging progresses. Copper tends to be lost from this same enzyme system, and
the state of the water is altered as the energetic processes change.

While the flow of carbon dioxide moves from the mitochondrion to the cytoplasm
and beyond, tending to remove calcium from the mitochondrion and cell, the
flow of lactate and other organic ions into the mitochondrion can produce
calcium accumulation in the mitochondrion, during conditions in which carbon
dioxide synthesis, and consequently urea synthesis, are depressed, and other
synthetic processes are changed.

Glycolysis produces both pyruvate and lactate, and excessive pyruvate produces
almost the same inhibitory effect as lactate; since the Crabtree effect
involves nitric oxide and fatty acids as well as calcium, I think it is
reasonable to look for the simplest sort of explanation, instead of trying to
experimentally trace all the possible interactions of these substances; a
simple physical competition between the products of glycolysis and carbon
dioxide, for the binding sites, such as lysine, that would amount to a phase
change in the mitochondrion. Glucose, and apparently glycolysis, are required
for the production of nitric oxide, as for the accumulation of calcium, at
least in some types of cell, and these coordinated changes, which lower energy
production, could be produced by a reduction in carbon dioxide, in a physical
change even more basic than the energy level represented by ATP. The use of
Krebs cycle substances in the synthesis of amino acids, and other products,
would decrease the formation of C02, creating a situation in which the system
would have two possible states, one, the glycolytic stress state, and the
other, the carbon dioxide producing energy-efficient state.

Besides the frequently discussed interactions of excessively accumulated iron
with the unsaturated fatty acids, producing lipid peroxides and other toxins,
the accumulated calcium very probably forms some insoluble soaps with the free
fatty acids which are released even from intracellular fats during stress. The
growth of new mitochondria probably occasionally leaves behind such useless
materials, combining soaps, iron, and porphyrins remaining from damaged
respiratory enzymes.

When the background of carbon dioxide is high, circulation and oxygenation
tend to prevent the anaerobic glycolysis that produces toxic lactic acid, so
that a given level of activity will be harmful or helpful, depending on the
level of carbon dioxide being produced at rest.

Preventively, avoiding foods containing lactic acid, such as yogurt and
sauerkraut, would be helpful, since bacterial lactic acid is much more toxic
than the type that we form under stress. Avoiding the stress-promoting
antithyroid unsaturated oils is extremely important. Their role in diabetes,
cancer, and other age-related and degenerative diseases (and I think this
includes the estrogen-promoted autoimmune diseases) is well established.
Avoiding phytoestrogens and other things that increase estrogen exposure, such
as protein deficiency, is important, because estrogen causes increased levels
of free fatty acids, increases the tendency to metabolize them at the expense
of glucose metabolism, increases the tissue content of unsaturated fatty
acids, and inhibits thyroid functions.

Light promotes glucose oxidation, and is known to activate the key respiratory
enzyme. Winter sickness (including lethargy and weight gain), and night
stress, have to be included within the idea of the "respiratory defect,"
shifting to the antirespiratory production of lactic acid, and damaging the
mitochondria.

Therapeutically, even powerful toxins that block the glycolytic enzymes can
improve functions in a variety of organic disturbances "associated with"
(caused by) excessive production of lactic acid. Unfortunately, the toxin that
has become standard treatment for lactic acidosis—dichloroacetic acid—is a
carcinogen, and eventually produces liver damage and acidosis. But several
nontoxic therapies can do the same things: **Palmitate (formed from sugar
under the influence of thyroid hormone, and found in coconut oil), vitamin Bl,
biotin, lipoic acid, carbon dioxide, thyroid, naloxone, acetazolamide, for
example.** Progesterone, by blocking estrogen's disruptive effects on the
mitochondria, ranks along with thyroid and a diet free of polyunsaturate fats,
for importance in mitochondrial maintenance.

**REFERENCES**

Biochim Biophys Acta 1999 Feb 9;1410(2):171-82 **Mitochondrial involvement in
Alzheimer's** disease.Bonilla E, Tanji K, Hirano M, Vu TH, DiMauro S, Schon
EA.

Rev Pneumol Clin 1986;42(5):238-41. **Acid-base balance and blood lactate and
pyruvate levels in albino rats bred under normobaric hypoxia or normoxia,
after muscular work in a hypoxic or hypoxic-hypercapnic environment.**
Quatrini U, Licciardi A.

Muscle Nerve 1999 Feb;22(2):258-61. **Acute exercise causes mitochondrial DNA
deletion in rat skeletal muscle.** Sakai Y, Iwamura Y, Hayashi J, Yamamoto N,
Ohkoshi N, Nagata H.

HumMol Genet 1999 Jun;8(6): 1047-52. **Gene shifting:** **a novel therapy for
mitochondrial myopathy.** Taivassalo T, Fu K _,_ Johns T, Arnold D, Karpati G,
Shoubridge EA.

Brain Dev 1989;11(3):195-7. **Effect of sodium dichloroacetate on human
pyruvate metabolism.** Naito E, Kuroda Y, Toshima K, Takeda E, Saijo T,
Kobashi H, Yokota I, Ito M.

Mech Ageing Dev 1987 Aug;39(3):281-8. **Lack of age-dependent changes in rat
heart mitochondria.** Manzelmann MS, Harmon HJ.

Adv Shock Res 1978,1:105-16. **The effect of mitochondrial dysfunction on
glucose metabolism during shock.** Rhodes RS.

Biochem J 1982 Dec 15;208(3):695-701 **Exercise-induced alterations of hepatic
mitochondrial function.** Tate CA, Wolkowicz PE, McMillin-Wood, J.

Am J Physiol 1997 Dec;273(6 Pt 2):F869-76. **Neurosteroid inhibition of cell
death.** Waters SL, Miller GW, Aleo MD, Schnellmann RG.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1990. May;253(2):628-35. **Protection against hypoxic
injury in isolated-perfused rat heart by ruthenium red.** Park Y, Bowles DK,
Kehrer JP.

Environ Health Perspect 1984, Aug;57:281-7. **Cell calcium, cell injury and
cell death.** Trump BF, Berezesky IK, Sato T, Laiho KU, Phelps PC, DeClaris N.

Anesth Analg 1996 Oct;83(4):782-8. **Small-volume resuscitation using
hypertonic saline improves organ perfusion in burned rats.** Kien ND,
Antognini JF, Reilly DA, Moore PG.

Respir Physiol 1977 Dec;31(3):387-95. **Post-hypercapnia recovery in the dog:
arterial blood acid-base equilibrium and glycolysis.** Saunier C, Horsky P,
Hannhart B, Garcia-Carmona T, Hartemann D.

Am J Physiol 1997 Nov;273(5 Pt 1):C1732-8 **Glycolysis inhibition by palmitate
in renal cells cultured in a two-chamber system.** Bolon C; Gauthier C;
Simonnet H.

Can J Appi Physiol 1998 Dec;23(6):558-69. **The role of glucose in the
regulation of substrate interaction during exercise.** Sidossis LS.

Am J Clin Nutr 1998 Mar;67(3 Suppl):527S-530S. **Effect of lipid oxidation on
glucose utilization in humans.** JequierE.

Ann N Y Acad Sci 1998 Nov 20;854:224-38. **Mitochondrial free radical
production and aging in mammals and birds.** Barja G.

**Science 1999 Aug** 27;285(5432): 1390-3. **Gene expression profile of aging
and its retardation by caloric restriction.** Lee CK, Klopp RG, Weindruch R,
Prolla TA.

Nucleic Acids Res 1999 Nov 15;27(22):4510-6. **Nitric oxide-induced damage to
mtDNA and its subsequent repair.** Grishko VI, Druzhyna N, LeDoux SP, Wilson
GL.

Am J Physiol 1998 Jun;274(6 Pt 1):G978-83. **Neural injury, repair and
adaptation in the GI tract. I. New insights into neuronal injury:** a
cautionary tale. Hall KE, Wiley JW.

Proc Nati Acad Sci U S A 1999 Dec 21;96(26): 14706-14711. **Structural details
of an interaction between cardiolipin and an integral membrane protein.**
McAuley KE, Fyfe PK, Ridge JP, Isaacs NW, Cogdell RJ, Jones MR.

J. Appi Physiol 1991 Apr;70(4): 1720-30.. **.Metabolic and work efficiencies
during exercise in Andean natives.** Hochachka PW, Stanley C, Matheson GO,
McKenzie DC, Allen PS, Parkhouse WS.

JDev Physiol 1990 Sep;14(3): 139-46. **Effect of lactate and beta-
hydroxybutyrate infusions on brain metabolism in the fetal sheep.** Harding
JE, Charlton VE.

J Trauma 1999 Feb;46(2):286-91, **The effects of diaspirin cross-linked
hemoglobin on hemodynamics, metabolic acidosis, and survival in burned
rats.:** Soltero RG; Hansbrough JF.

J Trauma 1999 Apr;46(4):582-8; discussion 588-9, **Resuscitation with lactated
Ringer's solution in rats with hemorrhagic shock induces immediate
apoptosis.** Deb S; Martin B; Sun L; Ruff P; Burris D; Rich N; DeBreux S;
Austin B; Rhee P.

Am J Physiol 1996 Oct;271(4 Pt 1):C1244-9, **Glucose and pyruvate regulate
cytokine-induced nitric oxide production by cardiac myocytes.** Oddis CV;
Finkel MS.

Biochim Biophys Acta 1999 Feb 9;1410(2):171-82. **Mitochondrial involvement in
Alzheimer's disease.** Bonilla E, Tanji K, Hirano M, Vu TH, DiMauro S, Schon
EA.

Adv Exp Med Biol 1995,384:185-94. **Metabolic correlates of fatigue from
different types of exercise in man.** Vollestad NK.

J Biol Chem 1995 Jun 23;270(25): 14855-8. **Nitric oxide activates the
glucose-dependent mobilization of arachidonic acid in a macrophage-like cell
line (RAW 264.7) that is largely mediated by calcium-independent phospholipase
A2.** GrossRW **;** Rudolph AE; Wang **J;** Sommers CD; Wolf MJ.

  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2016. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

