![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Multiple sclerosis, protein, fats, and progesterone**  

==============================================

We are always subjected to antigenic burdens. The important question has to do
with our ability to limit the inflammatory response to these burdens.

In MS, it is clear that the inflammatory process itself is destructive, and
that estrogen is a major predisposing factor. Unsaturated fatty acids, and
dietary imbalance of amino acids interact closely with hyperestrogenism and
hypothyroidism to produce the autoimmune degenerative diseases.

Reduction of the mediators of inflammation is better than augmenting a single
antiinflammatory agent such as cortisol. Although immunosuppressive drugs,
including the "essential fatty acids," do alleviate inflammatory symptoms
temporarily, they probably contribute to the underlying pathology.

People with MS have chronically increased production of cortisol. This creates
a distortion of protein assimilation, resembling a nutritional protein
deficiency. Excessive serotonin and estrogen cause a relatively uncontrolled
production of cortisol. A vicious circle of inflammatory mediators and amino
acid imbalance can result.

Depression, lupus, migraine, menopause, diabetes, and aging have several
important metabolic features in common with MS.

Popular therapies are illogical, and are likely to cause disease progression.

High quality protein, thyroid, pregnenolone and progesterone tend to correct
the underlying pathology. These are antiinflammatory, but they are not
immunosuppressive or catabolic.

High altitude and sunny climate are associated with a low incidence of MS.

==============================================  

Multiple sclerosis (MS), like other autoimmune diseases, affects women more
often than men (about 2 to 1), has its onset during the reproductive years
(especially after the age of 30, when estrogen is very high), is often
exacerbated premenstrually, and is sometimes alleviated by pregnancy (Drew and
Chavez, 2000), when progesterone is very high. Women with a high ratio of
estrogen to progesterone have been found to have the most active brain lesions
(Bansil, et al., 1999). Most of the mediators of inflammation that are
involved in MS--mast cells, nitric oxide (NO), serotonin, prolactin, lipid
peroxidation, free fatty acids, prostaglandins and isoprostanes, and the
various cytokines (IL, TNF)--are closely associated with estrogen's actions,
and in animals, autoimmune diseases can be brought on by treatment with
estrogen (Ahmed and Talal).

The strong association of MS with estrogen has led to an illogical, but
popular and well-publicized medical conclusion that estrogen is protective
against MS, and some have claimed that estrogen has beneficial therapeutic
effects. This strange way of thinking has its equivalent in the idea that,
since women are much more likely than men to develop Alzheimer's disease,
estrogen is protective against it; or that, since women have more fragile
bones than men do, and their progressive bone loss occurs during the times of
their greatest exposure to estrogen, estrogen prevents osteoporosis.

In this medical environment, close associations between estrogen and
degenerative diseases are acknowledged, but they are given a meaning contrary
to common sense by saying that the association occurs because there isn't
enough estrogen. The stove burns you because it isn't hot enough.

As Dave Barry would say, I'm not making this up. Recently well publicized
articles have suggested that estrogen protects the brain (even against
stroke!) because it increases serotonin and NO. There is something almost
esthetically pleasing when so many major errors are concentrated into a single
article. Nitric oxide and serotonin are both neurotoxic (Joseph, et al., 1991;
Skaper, et al., 1996; Parkinson, et al., 1997; Santiago, et al., 1998; Barger,
et al., 2000), as a result of suppressing mitochondrial respiration. NO plays
a major role in lipid peroxidation and demyelination. It's interesting to see
serotonin and NO openly associated with estrogen, whose mitochondrial toxicity
has been carefully hidden from public view.  

There are several theories about the cause of MS, old theories about genes and
viruses, and newer theories about bacteria, vitamin deficiencies, oil
deficiencies, poisons, and reactions to vaccinations (especially for hepatitis
B and influenza). The only theory that has been abandoned is the 19th century
psychiatric theory about "hysterical paralysis," though occasionally someone
does still talk about emotional causes of multiple sclerosis; the term "female
hysteria" has evolved into "conversion disorder."

Each of the main theories has a few facts that seem to support it, but
neglects to account for many other facts. Everyone agrees that the immune
system is involved in MS in some way, but that's really where the problem
starts, because of the idea that inflammation is an intrinsic part of
immunity. If "inflammation is necessary and good," then it becomes a problem
to define exactly where the boundary is between an appropriate reaction and a
degenerative process. Edema, reduced cellular respiration, loss of normal
functions, fibrosis in its various degrees, each component of inflammation can
be seen in a good light, as part of a "defensive immune reaction." When tissue
injury leads to repair, it "must" be seen as beneficial, even if it leads to
the formation of a scar in place of functional tissue, because the comparison
is between an imagined worst possible outcome, and an imperfect recovery,
rather than comparing the inflammatory process with the possibility that a
potentially noxious agent might have done no harm at all.

The simplest illustration of how inflammation relates to the organism's
resources was an experiment in which blood glucose was varied, while an animal
was exposed to chemicals that varied from mildly irritating to potentially
deadly. When the animal had very low blood sugar, the mildest irritant could
be deadly, but when its blood glucose was kept very high, even the deadly
antigens were only mildly irritating. Varying the blood sodium concentration
had similar, but weaker, effects.

There is a tendency to see inflammation not only as a normal part of immunity,
but to see it as being proportional to the nature of the antigen, except when
the immune system has been primed for it by previous contact, in which case
the organism will either not react at all (because it has become immune), or
it will react much more violently than it did on the first exposure, because
it has become allergic. But, in reality, the mere concentration of glucose and
sodium in the blood (and of thyroid, and many other substances that aren't
considered to be part of the immune system) can make a tremendous difference
in the degree of "immunological" reaction.

In the excessively sensitive condition produced by hypoglycemia, several
things happen that contribute to the maladaptive exaggerated inflammatory
response.

Adrenaline increases in hypoglycemia, and, if the adrenaline fails to convert
glycogen into glucose, it will provide an alternative fuel by liberating free
fatty acids from fat cells.

If the liberated fatty acids are unsaturated, they will cause serotonin to be
secreted, and both serotonin and the unsaturated fatty acids will suppress
mitochondrial respiration, exacerbating the hypoglycemia. They will stimulate
the release of cytokines, activating a variety of immunological and
inflammatory processes, and they will cause blood vessels to become leaky,
creating edema and starting the first stages of fibrosis. Both adrenaline and
serotonin will stimulate the release of cortisol, which mobilizes amino acids
from tissues such as the large skeletal muscles. Those muscles contain a large
amount of cysteine and tryptophan, which, among other effects, suppress the
thyroid. The increased tryptophan, especially in the presence of free fatty
acids, is likely to be converted into additional serotonin, since fatty acids
release tryptophan from albumin, increasing its entry into the brain. Free
fatty acids and increased serotonin reduce metabolic efficiency (leading to
insulin resistance, for example) and promote an inflammatory state.

Fats in the blood-stream have easy access to the brain, and the unsaturated
free fatty acids produce brain edema (Chan, et al., 1983, 1988). When brain
edema is caused by vascular leakage, proteins that are normally excluded can
enter. The stimulated, excited and fatigued brain exchanges glutamine for
tryptophan, accelerating its uptake from the blood.

When a tissue is injured or stressed, antibodies are formed in response to the
altered components of that tissue. Therefore, we could call a bruise or a
sprain an autoimmune condition, but there are no commercial tests for bruised-
shin antibodies. The availability of tests for specific antibodies seems to be
the essential factor in classifying a condition as autoimmune, as in
"autoimmune thyroiditis." Unfortunately, this way of using language is nested
in a culture that is full of unrealistic ideas of causality, and thousands of
people build their careers on the search for the "mutated genes that are
responsible for the disease," and for the drugs that will correct the defect.

Early in the study of immunology, the focus was on antibodies. Even earlier,
inflammation had been conceptualized in terms of the "humors," and other
prescientific ideas. As soon as multiple sclerosis/hysterical paralysis was
classified as an autoimmune disease, primitive ideas about the nature of the
immune system, interacting with primitive ideas about the nature of the brain
and the structure of cells, blended into the various theories of what the
disease is.

Rather than seeing immunological nerve damage as the cause of all the other
features of multiple sclerosis, I think it's important to look at some of the
general features of the condition, as contexts in which to interpret the
events in the nerves.  

It has been known for a long time that the incidence of MS tends to increase
with distance from the equator. Incidence is low in sunny dry climates, and at
high altitudes. Two clear dietary influences have been found: eating pork, and
horsemeat.

People with MS don't regulate their body temperature very well. Their nerve
conduction is slow, and in normal people, conduction is faster at higher
temperatures, but in people with MS the conduction is slower at the normal
temperature of 98.6O F than at lower temperatures. A subnormal temperature is
also associated with old age, and with the hot flashes of menopause.

Brain metabolism of glucose is very low in multiple sclerosis, and in my own
observations, the general metabolic rate is subnormal. However, some people
reason that the hypometabolism is caused by the lesions, rather than vice
versa.

Animals that lack the unsaturated fatty acids have a higher metabolic rate and
ability to use glucose, converting it to CO2 more readily, have a greater
resistance to toxins (Harris, et al., 1990; even cobra venom: Morganroth, et
al., 1989), including endotoxin (Li, et al., 1990)--preventing excessive
vascular leakage--and to immunological damage (Takahashi, et al., 1992), and
to trauma, and their neuromuscular response is accelerated while fast twitch
muscles are less easily fatigued (Ayre and Hulber, 1996).

In people with MS, the blood is more viscous, and the platelets tend to clump
together more easily. Their cortisol level is higher than normal, and their
pituitary adrenal-cortex-stimulating hormone is harder to suppress. This is a
condition that is also seen in depression and old age. Despite the chronically
elevated cortisol, people with MS typically have hypoglycemia. They are
occasionally found to have low blood sodium, hyponatremia, but this is hard to
determine when the blood's water content is variable. Their prolactin is
likely to be high, and this can result from high estrogen, high serotonin, low
sodium, or low thyroid. Drinking too much water can increase prolactin, and
can damage the nerves' myelin enclosures; too much serotonin tends to cause
excessive drinking. Disturbances of blood glucose, sodium, and water content
can disrupt the brain's myelin structure. High estrogen disturbs the blood
osmotically, making it retain too much water in relation to the solutes, and
this relates to many of estrogen's effects; since simple osmotic variations
can damage the myelin structures, it seems that this mechanism should be
investigated thoroughly before it is assumed that the immunological events are
primary.

Mast cells, which promote inflammation by releasing substances such as
histamine and serotonin (and make blood vessels leaky), are more numerous in
the brain in multiple sclerosis than in normal brains. Since platelet clumping
releases serotonin, and also because serotonin excess is suggested by so many
other features of MS, serotonin antagonists (ondansetron and ketanserin, for
example) have been used therapeutically with success.

Estrogen causes mast cells to release their inflammatory mediators, and it
causes platelets to aggregate, releasing their serotonin. Since estrogen
dominance is closely associated with the presence of active brain lesions,
antiestrogen therapy would seem obvious in MS. Progesterone counteracts
estrogen's effects on both mast cells and platelets.

Aspirin protects against a variety of inflammatory processes, but it's most
famous for the inhibition of prostaglandins. While aspirin is often used to
relieve pain in MS, and another inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis,
indomethacin, has been used therapeutically in MS, it would seem appropriate
to investigate more carefully aspirin's possible role in preventing or
relieving MS.

A simple protein deficiency has many surprising effects. It lowers body
temperature, and suppresses the thyroid, but it increases inflammation and the
tendency of blood to clot. Since the brain and heart and lungs require a
continuous supply of essential amino acids if they are to continue
functioning, in the absence of dietary protein, cortisol must be produced
continuously to mobilize amino acids from the expendable tissues, which are
mainly the skeletal muscles. These muscles have a high concentration of
tryptophan and cysteine, which suppress the thyroid. Cysteine is excitoxic,
and tryptophan is the precursor for serotonin. Presumably, their presence in,
and stress-induced release from, the muscles is one of the mechanisms that
reduce metabolic activity during certain types of stress.

When pregnant animals are deprived of protein, the newborn animals have
abnormally high levels of serotonin, and the enzymes responsible for that
excess tend to maintain the serotonin excess even when they are grown and have
adequate protein. This is analogous to the effect of excess estrogen early in
life, which creates a tendency to develop breast or prostate cancer in
adulthood. It would be interesting to study the gestational experience, e.g.,
length of gestation and birth weight, of the people who later develop MS.

Although people in the northern countries aren't normally protein-starved,
they do tend to get a large part of their protein from the muscle meats. In
traditional cultures, all parts of the food animals were eaten--chicken feet,
heads, and necks, animals' ears and eyeballs, etc.--and so the amino acid
balance was favorable for maintaining a high metabolic rate and preventing
stress.

The observation that multiple sclerosis is associated with the consumption of
pork and horsemeat, but not beef, lamb, or goat, is very interesting, since
the fat of those animals is essentially like the fats of the plant materials
that they eat, meaning that it is extremely high in linoleic and linolenic
acids. The rumen of cows, sheep, and goats contains bacteria that convert the
polyunsaturated fats into more saturated fats. Unsaturated fats inhibit the
enzymes that digest protein, and MS patients have been reported to have poor
digestion of meat (Gupta, et al., 1977).

The polyunsaturated fats are in themselves toxic to mitochondria, and suppress
glucose oxidation, and inhibit the thyroid function, with the same suppressive
effect on the ability to oxidize glucose, but they are also turned,
enzymically, into the prostaglandins, and non-enzymically, by spontaneous
lipid peroxidation, into the toxic isoprostanes. The isoprostanes, and some of
the prostaglandins, are elevated in the brain and other tissues of people with
MS.

Lipid peroxidation is very high in multiple sclerosis. Nitric oxide (whose
synthesis is promoted by estrogen in most parts of the brain) is a free
radical that activates peroxidation.

Lipid peroxidation selectively destroys, naturally, the unstable
polyunsaturated fats. In atherosclerosis, the blood vessel plaques contain
very little unsaturated fat. This is because they are peroxidized so rapidly,
but their high ratio of saturated to unsaturated fats has been used to argue
that the polyunsaturated oils are "heart protective." Similar arguments are
often made in MS, though some studies don't support the idea that there is a
lack of any of the unsaturated fats. Since lipid peroxidation is very high, it
would be reasonable to assume that there was an abundance of polyunsaturated
fats being peroxidized through reactions with catalysts such as iron (S.M.
LeVine, 1997) and nitric oxide and peroxynitrile.

I believe that an important aspect of the intolerance for heat so often
reported in people with MS could be the tendency of relative hyperthermia to
release increased amounts of free fatty acids into the blood stream. Women,
because of estrogen's effects, usually have much higher levels of free fatty
acids in the blood than men do. Estrogen increases the release of free fatty
acids from stored fat, and the unsaturated fats synergize with both estrogen
and prolactin, increasing their effects.  

Temperature regulation apparently involves some nerve cells that sense
temperature very accurately, and change their activity accordingly. Water has
a remarkably high heat capacity, meaning that it takes a relatively large
amount of heat to change its temperature. The "disappearing heat" is being
consumed by structural changes in the water. Proteins have the same sort of
structural complexity as water, and together they can make effective
temperature transducers, "thermometers." (Other substances tend to undergo
major structural changes only as they melt or vaporize. The famous "liquid
crystals" have a few distinct structural phases, but cytoplasm is like a very
subtle liquid crystal.) The "thermostat cells" are actually responding to a
degree of internal structure, not to the temperature in the abstract. So
things that change their internal structure will modify their temperature
"set-point."

Increased estrogen causes an animal to lower its temperature, and it probably
does this by increasing the "structural temperature" of the thermostat cells,
"melting" their internal structure. Progesterone causes the animal to increase
its temperature, and it apparently does this by increasing the
structure/decreasing the structural temperature of the thermostat cells. If
you put ice in the thermostat, the room gets hot.

A cell's internal structure is equivalent to its readiness to work. Fatigue
represents a slightly "melted" state of the cell, in which structure appears
to have been consumed along with the chemical energy reserves. Experiments
that demonstrated this effect were very clear, but they were ignored because
they didn't fit people's stereotyped idea of the cell. With a very sensitive
thermometer, it's possible to measure the heat produced by a nerve when it is
stimulated. That's not surprising. But it's surprising that, when the nerve is
recovering from the stimulation, it absorbs heat from its environment,
lowering the temperature locally. That even violated some people's conception
of "entropy," but it can easily be demonstrated that changing the form of some
materials changes their heat capacity, as when a rubber band is stretched (it
gets hot), or contracts (it gets cooler).

The excitants, estrogen and cortisol, slow the conduction of nerves, because
they cause its internal structure to be dissipated. They create a "pre-
fatigued" state in the cell.

In experiments with rabbit hearts, Szent-Gyorgyi showed that estrogen
decreased the heart's readiness to work, and that progesterone increased its
readiness to work, and he said it did this by "building structure." He pointed
out that, for a given drug or other stimulus, cells have a characteristic
response, becoming either more activated or more inhibited, but he showed
that, outside the normal concentration or intensity range of the stimulus, a
cell's response is often reversed.

If this is the situation in the nerves in MS, it explains the strange
behavior, in which warming the nerve reduces its function. The implication is
that internal structure (and energy) must be restored to the nerves. In
experiments that I have described in previous newsletters, increasing sodium,
ATP, carbon dioxide, and progesterone, and increasing the ratio of magnesium
to calcium, have been found to increase cellular energy and structure. The
thyroid hormone is ultimately responsible for maintaining cells' energy and
structure, and responsiveness, but if it is increased suddenly without
allowing all the other factors to adjust, it will raise the temperature too
suddenly. It needn't take a long time, but all the factors have to be present
at the same time.

Serotonin, melatonin, estrogen, and polyunsaturated fats all tend to lower
body temperature. Since estrogen and the unsaturated fats are cellular
excitants, the actual decrease in body temperature helps to offset their
excitatory effects.

Both bright light and high altitude tend to reduce serotonin's effects. The
tissue carbon dioxide retained at high altitude reduces the incidence of many
diseases, and multiple sclerosis might be affected as heart disease and cancer
are. It is known that carbon dioxide is involved in myelin's regulation of its
own water content. Hyperventilation, by causing a loss of carbon dioxide,
releases both histamine and serotonin, making blood more viscous, while making
blood vessels more permeable, and causing them to constrict.

If people with MS have developed it through the interactions of excessive
estrogen, serotonin, unsaturated fats, iron, and water, and deficient thyroid,
and deficient pregnenolone produced in the myelin-forming cells
(oligodendrocytes), there are many things that can be done to stop its
progress, and possibly to reverse it.

Since a sudden increase in temperature will release increased amounts of the
pro-inflammatory fats, things should be changed gradually. Increased salt is
thermogenic, but increased magnesium is protective against hyperthermia, so
increased magnesium (epsom salts baths, for example, coffee, fruits, some
vegetables and meats) would be helpful. Magnesium is rapidly lost from cells
in hypothyroidism. Sugar, when accompanied by fats and minerals, as in milk,
is needed to lower cortisol, and to maintain thyroid activity. Balanced
proteins, such as cheese, potatoes, eggs, and beef- or lamb-broth (for the
gelatin and mineral content in particular) will prevent the tryptophan excess
that suppresses the thyroid and is potentially a nerve toxin. Saturated fats,
used regularly, reduce the immediate toxic antimetabolic effects of the stored
unsaturated fats, but it takes a long time to change the balance of stored
fats.

Since aspirin lowers temperature, is antiinflammatory, in some situations
antiestrogenic, and is a powerful antioxidant, it is likely that it would
alleviate symptoms and prevent progression of MS, as it does in other
degenerative diseases. Since platelet aggregation is likely to be involved in
the focuses of inflammation, aspirin might help to prevent the formation of
new areas of damage.

While the glucocorticoids are useful for their antiinflammatory actions,
cortisol is known to promote the killing of brain cells by excitotoxicity.
Since estrogen decreases GABA, and both estrogen and serotonin activate the
excitatory amino acid transmitters, the addition of synthetic glucocorticoids
to the pre-existing cortisol excess is likely to damage parts of the brain in
addition to the inflamed areas.

The excess cortisol of depression, old age, and hyperestrogenism often comes
down with use of a thyroid supplement, but pregnenolone has a very direct
action (in opposition to serotonin) that can quiet the pituitary, reducing
ACTH and cortisol. Progesterone has some similar effects, and is protective
against excess cortisol, and is a major factor in nerve and brain restoration.
Thyroid, progesterone, and pregnenolone are all involved in the formation of
new myelin, and in the prevention of the edema that damages it.

Since thyroid and progesterone decrease the formation of estrogen in inflamed
tissue, while cortisol stimulates its formation, it would seem wise to use
thyroid and progesterone for their immediate antiinflammatory effects, which
include the inhibition of NO formation (Drew and Chavez, 2000), and their lack
of the excitotoxic, estrogen-stimulating effects of the glucocorticoids. While
the glucocorticoids are catabolic and liberate cysteine and tryptophan from
muscles, thyroid and progesterone are not catabolic, and protect against the
toxic consequences of those amino acids.  

REFERENCES

J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1988 Feb;51(2):260-5. Perivascular iron
deposition and other vascular damage in multiple sclerosis. Adams CW. "The
multiple sclerosis cases showed venous intramural fibrinoid deposition (7%),
recent haemorrhages (17%), old haemorrhages revealed by haemosiderin
deposition (30%), thrombosis (6%) and thickened veins (19%). In all, 41% of
all multiple sclerosis cases showed some evidence of vein damage."
"Haemosiderin deposition was common in the substantia nigra and other
pigmented nuclei in all cases. It is concluded that the cerebral vein wall in
multiple sclerosis is subject to chronic inflammatory damage, which promotes
haemorrhage and increased permeability, and constitutes a form of vasculitis."

Am J Pathol 1985 Dec;121(3):531-51. Sex hormones, immune responses, and
autoimmune diseases. Mechanisms of sex hormone action. Ansar Ahmed S, Penhale
WJ, Talal N. "Immune reactivity is greater in females than in males. In both
experimental animals and in man there is a greater preponderance of autoimmune
diseases in females, compared with males. Studies in many experimental models
have established that the underlying basis for this sex-related susceptibility
is the marked effects of sex hormones. Sex hormones influence the onset and
severity of immune-mediated pathologic conditions by modulating lymphocytes at
all stages of life, prenatal, prepubertal, and postpubertal."

J Appl Physiol 1996 Feb;80(2):464-71. Effects of changes in dietary fatty
acids on isolated skeletal muscle functions in rats. Ayre KJ, Hulbert AJ The
effects of manipulating dietary levels of essential polyunsaturated fatty
acids on the function of isolated skeletal muscles in male Wistar rats were
examined. Three isoenergetic diets were used: an essential fatty acid-
deficient diet (EFAD), a diet high in essential (n-6) fatty acids [High
(n-6)], and a diet enriched with essential (n-3) fatty acids [High (n-3)].
After 9 wk, groups of rats on each test diet were fed a stock diet of
laboratory chow for a further 6 wk. Muscle function was examined by using a
battery of five tests for soleus (slow twitch) and extensor digitorum longus
(EDL; fast twitch). Tests included single muscle twitches, sustained tetanic
contractions, posttetanic potentiation, sustained high-frequency stimulation,
and intermittent low-frequency stimulation. Results for muscles from the High
(n-6) and High (n-3) groups were very similar. However, the EFAD diet resulted
in significantly lower muscular tensions and reduced response times compared
with the High (n-6) and High (n-3) diets. Peak twitch tension in soleus
muscles was 16-21% less in the EFAD group than in the High (n-6) and High
(n-3) groups, respectively [analysis of variance (ANOVA), P < 0.01). During
high-frequency stimulation, EDL muscles from the EFAD rats fatigued 32% more
quickly (ANOVA, P < 0.01)]. Also, twitch contraction and half-relaxation times
were significantly 5-7% reduced in the EFAD group (ANOVA, P < 0.01). During
intermittent low-frequency stimulation, soleus muscles from the EFAD group
generated 25-28% less tension than did the other groups (ANOVA, P < 0.01), but
in EDL muscles from the EFAD group, endurance was 20% greater than in the High
(n-6) group (ANOVA, P < 0.05). After 6 wk on the stock diet, there were no
longer any differences between the dietary groups. Manipulation of dietary
fatty acids results in significant, but reversible, effects in muscles of rats
fed an EFAD diet.

Endocr Res 1999 May;25(2):207-14. Prolactin secretion is increased in patients
with multiple sclerosis. Azar ST, Yamout B

Acta Neurol Scand 1999 Feb;99(2):91-4. Correlation between sex hormones and
magnetic resonance imaging lesions in multiple sclerosis. Bansil S, Lee HJ,
Jindal S, Holtz CR, Cook SD "Patients with high estradiol and low progesterone
levels had a significantly greater number of Gd enhancing lesions than those
with low levels of both these hormones. Patients with a high estrogen to
progesterone ratio had a significantly greater number of active MRI lesions
than those with a low ratio."

J Neuroimmunol 1996 Mar;65(1):75-81. Circulating antibodies directed against
conjugated fatty acids in sera of patients with multiple sclerosis. Boullerne
A, Petry KG, Geffard M "These results suggest that in MS and RA, autoepitopes
on cell membranes that are normally hidden from the immune system become
immunogenic. This may arise because of previous membrane disruption by
oxidative processes."

J Neurosci Res 2000 Nov 15;62(4):503-9. Dehydroepiandrosterone inhibits
microglial nitric oxide production in a stimulus-specific manner. Barger SW,
Chavis JA, Drew PD.

J Exp Med 1984 Nov 1;160(5):1532-43. Inhibition of autoimmune
neuropathological process by treatment with an iron-chelating agent. Bowern N,
Ramshaw IA, Clark IA, Doherty PC "Iron is believed to influence both the
migration and function of immune effector cells. It can also act as a catalyst
in the formation of free radicals, which are highly toxic agents causing
tissue damage in sites of inflammation."

J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1981 Apr;44(4):340-3. Rheological and
fibrinolytic findings in multiple sclerosis. Brunetti A, Ricchieri GL,
Patrassi GM, Girolami A, Tavolato B. "The whole blood viscosity was found to
be increased in multiple sclerosis."

J Neurochem 1988 Apr;50(4):1185-93. Induction of intracellular superoxide
radical formation by arachidonic acid and by polyunsaturated fatty acids in
primary astrocytic cultures. Chan PH, Chen SF, Yu AC "Other PUFAs, including
linoleic acid, linolenic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid, were also effective
in stimulating NBF formation in astrocytes, whereas saturated palmitic acid
and monounsaturated oleic acid were ineffective. Similar effects of these
PUFAs were observed in malondialdehyde formation in cells and lactic acid
accumulation in incubation medium. These data indicate that both membrane
integrity and cellular metabolism were perturbed by arachidonic acid and by
other PUFAs."

Ann Neurol 1983 Jun;13(6):625-32. Induction of brain edema following
intracerebral injection of arachidonic acid. Chan PH, Fishman RA, Caronna J,
Schmidley JW, Prioleau G, Lee J "Intracerebral injection of polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs), including linolenic acid (18:3) and arachidonic acid
(20:4), caused significant increases in cerebral water and sodium content
concomitant with decreases in potassium content and Na+- and K+- dependent
adenosine triphosphatase activity. There was gross and microscopic evidence of
edema. Saturated fatty acids and monounsaturated fatty acid were not effective
in inducing brain edema. The [125I]-bovine serum albumin spaces increased
twofold and threefold at 24 hours with 18:3 and 20:4, respectively, indicating
vasogenic edema with increased permeability of brain endothelial cells" "These
data indicate that arachidonic acid and other PUFAs have the ability to induce
vasogenic and cellular brain edema and further support the hypothesis that the
degradation of phospholipids and accumulation of PUFAs, particularly
arachidonic acid, initiate the development of brain edema in various disease
states."

Med Sci Sports Exerc 1997 Jan;29(1):58-62. Effects of acute physical exercise
on central serotonergic systems. Chaouloff F "Works from the 1980's have
established that acute running increases brain serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine:
5-HT) synthesis in two ways. Lipolysis-elicited release of free fatty acids in
the blood compartment displaces the binding of the essential amino acid
tryptophan to albumin, thereby increasing the concentration of the so-called
"free tryptophan" portion, and because exercise increases the ratio of
circulating free tryptophan to the sum of the concentrations of the amino
acids that compete with tryptophan for uptake at the blood-brain barrier
level, tryptophan enters markedly in the brain compartment." "Indirect indices
of 5-HT functions open the possibility that acute exercise-induced increases
in 5-HT biosynthesis are associated with (or lead to) increases in 5-HT
release."

Med Hypotheses 1995 Nov;45(5):455-8. Melanin, melatonin, melanocyte-
stimulating hormone, and the susceptibility to autoimmune demyelination: a
rationale for light therapy in multiple sclerosis. Constantinescu CS "The
hypothesis formulated here is based on the observation that resistance to
multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis is associated
with dark skin pigmentation. While this may signify a protective role for
melanin against environmental factors producing oxidative damage, the
mechanism postulated here is that susceptibility to autoimmune demyelination
is influenced by hormonal factors, i.e. the neurohormones melatonin and
melanocyte stimulating hormone, which have opposing effects on immune
functions and, the same time, are important determinants of the individual's
production of melanin."

Neurosci Lett 1989 Nov 6;105(3):246-50. Presence of Schwann cells in
neurodegenerative lesions of the central nervous system. Dusart I, Isacson O,
Nothias F, Gumpel M, Peschanski M Ultrastructural analysis of
neurodegenerative CNS lesions produced by an excitotoxic substance revealed
that the majority of cells ensheathing axons were not oligodendrocytes. By
their morphology and the presence of both a basal lamina and collagen fibers
they were identified as Schwann cells. The presence of Schwann cells, whose
growth-promoting role in the peripheral nervous system has been largely
documented, may account for the development of regenerating growth cones which
have been observed in the excitotoxically lesioned central nervous system.
Further support for this hypothesis came from the analysis of fetal neural
transplants implanted into the lesioned area. Schwann cells ensheathing axons
were indeed numerous in the neuron-depleted area surrounding the transplants,
where neurite outgrowth of graft origin occurred.

J Neuroimmunol 2000 Nov 1;111(1-2):77-85. Female sex steroids: effects upon
microglial cell activation. Drew PD, Chavis JA.

Neurology 1999 Nov 10;53(8):1876-9 Cerebrospinal fluid isoprostane shows
oxidative stress in patients with multiple sclerosis. Greco A, Minghetti L,
Sette G, Fieschi C, Levi G "The CSF level of the isoprostane 8-epi-
prostaglandin (PG)-F2alpha (a reliable marker of oxidative stress in vivo) was
three times higher in subjects with definite MS than in a benchmark group of
subjects with other neurologic diseases."

J Intern Med 1989 Oct;226(4):241-4. Serum sex hormone and gonadotropin
concentrations in premenopausal women with multiple sclerosis. Grinsted L,
Heltberg A, Hagen C, Djursing H.

Am J Gastroenterol 1977 Dec;68(6):560-5. Multiple sclerosis and malabsorption.
Gupta JK, Ingegno AP, Cook AW, Pertschuk LP.

Free Radic Res 1997 Apr;26(4):351-62. Toxicity of polyunsaturated fatty acid
esters for human monocyte-macrophages: the anomalous behaviour of cholesteryl
linolenate. Hardwick SJ, Carpenter KL, Law NS, Van Der Veen C, Marchant CE,
Hird R, Mitchinson MJ. "The triglycerides showed a direct relationship between
toxicity and increasing unsaturation, which in turn correlated with increasing
susceptibility to oxidation." "Triarachidonin (20:4; omega-6),
trieicosapentaenoin (20:5; omega-3) and tridocosahexaenoin (22:6; omega-3)
were profoundly and rapidly toxic. There was a similar relationship between
toxicity and increasing unsaturation for most of the cholesterol esters, but
cholesteryl linolenate was apparently anomalous, being non-toxic in spite of
possessing three double bonds and being extensively oxidised." "The toxicity
of triglycerides suggests that polyunsaturated fatty acid peroxidation
products are also toxic."

J Clin Invest 1990 Oct;86(4):1115-23. Essential fatty acid deficiency
ameliorates acute renal dysfunction in the rat after the administration of the
aminonucleoside of puromycin. Harris KP, Lefkowith JB, Klahr S, Schreiner GF.

Mikrobiyol Bul 1989 Oct;23(4):342-7. [Leukotrienes and neurological diseases].
[Article in Turkish] Irkec C, Ercan S, Irkec M "LTC4 levels were found to be
elevated in MS and Behcet patient in comparison with controls. Augmentation of
LTC4 levels underlines the fact that leukotrienes may be held responsible the
pathogenesis of these disorders."

Lancet 1982 Feb 13;1(8268):380-6. Evidence for subacute fat embolism as the
cause of multiple sclerosis. James PB "The neurological features of
decompression sickness, which is thought to be due to gas embolism, are
similar to those of multiple sclerosis (MS). This similarity suggested the re-
examination of a concept, first proposed in 1882, that the demyelination in MS
is due to venous thrombosis. Unfortunately, although the plaques of MS are
often perivenular, thromboses are not always present. Nevertheless, vascular
theories can explain the topography of the lesions in MS." "There is also
evidence in man that fat may lodge in the microcirculation of the nervous
system and cause distal perivenous oedema with the loss of myelin from axons."

J Clin Pathol 1979 Oct;32(10):1025-9. Antithrombin activities in childhood
malnutrition. Jimenez RA, Jimenez E, Ingram GI, Mora LA, Atmetlla F, Carrillo
JM, Vargas W.

Arch Latinoam Nutr 1980 Dec;30(4):580-9. [Prethrombosis in child
malnutrition]. Jimenez R, Jimenez E, Mora LA, Vargas W, Atmetlla F, Carrillo
JM

Stroke 1991 Nov;22(11):1448-51. Platelet secretory products may contribute to
neuronal injury. Joseph R, Tsering C, Grunfeld S, Welch KM "The view that
certain endogenous substances, such as glutamate, may also contribute to
neuronal injury is now reasonably well established. Blood platelets are known
to contain and secrete a number of substances that have been associated with
neuronal dysfunction. Therefore, we hypothesize that a high concentration
(approximately several thousand-fold higher than in plasma, in our estimation)
of locally released platelet secretory products derived from the causative
thrombus may contribute to neuronal injury and promote reactive gliosis." "We
further observed that serotonin, a major platelet product, has neurotoxic
properties."

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1985;85(2):198-206. [Role of
disorders of the hemostatic system in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis
and ways of correcting them]. [Article in Russian] Karlov VA, Makarov VA,
Savina EB, Seleznev AN, Savin AA The changes in the hemostatic system were
studied in 77 patients with different patterns of disseminated sclerosis (DS).
The studies demonstrated activation of both vasculothrombocytic and
coagulation components of hemostasis as well as of fibrinolytic blood
properties. The latent course of the disseminated intravascular coagulation
was revealed in 20.7% of cases. The role of hemostatic disorders in the
pathogenetic mechanisms of DS is discussed. The patients with DS received
pathogenetic treatment including drugs eliminating hemostatic disorders, which
was beneficial for most patients.

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1990;90(11):47-50. [Changes in
rheological properties of blood in multiple sclerosis and their correction].
[Article in Russian] Karlov VA, Savin AA, Smertina LP, Redchits EG, Seleznev
AN, Svetailo LI, Margosiuk NV, Stulin ID As many as 45 patients with multiple
sclerosis were examined for rheological blood properties. As compared to
controls, the group under examination manifested the rise of plasma viscosity,
acceleration of red blood cell aggregation. 26.2% of patients demonstrated an
appreciable increase of blood viscosity. It is assumed that these changes
contribute to the deterioration of microcirculation and aggravate the
demyelinating process. Correction of the rheological properties of the blood
by plasmapheresis coupled with other methods of pathogenetic therapy turned
out effective.

Brain Res 1997 Jun 20;760(1-2):298-303 Iron deposits in multiple sclerosis and
Alzheimer's disease brains. LeVine SM "In summary, the localization of iron
deposition in MS and AD brains indicates potential sites where iron could
promote oxidative damage in these disease states."

Circ Shock 1990 Jun;31(2):159-70. Resistance of essential fatty acid-deficient
rats to endotoxin-induced increases in vascular permeability. Li EJ, Cook JA,
Spicer KM, Wise WC, Rokach J, Halushka PV.

FEBS Lett 1978 Nov 1;95(1):181-4. Selective inactivation of the NADH-
ubiquinone segment of the respiratory chain of submitochondrial particles by
endogenous free fatty acids during hyperthermia. Ludwig P, Bartels M, Schewe
T, Rapoport S.

J Pain Symptom Manage 2000 Nov;20(5):388-91. Ondansetron in multiple
sclerosis. Macleod AD. "Two young women with chronic nausea and vertigo caused
by multiple sclerosis responded to the introduction and maintenance of the
5HT3 receptor antagonist, ondansetron."

Am J Phys Med Rehabil 1994 Jul-Aug;73(4):283-5. Intracranial venous thrombosis
in a patient with multiple sclerosis. A case report and review of
contraceptive alternatives in patients with disabilities. Malanga GA, Gangemi
E.

Folia Biol (Praha) 1999;45(4):133-41. Essential fatty acids and related
molecular and cellular mechanisms in multiple sclerosis: new looks at old
concepts. Mayer M.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994 Sep;79(3):848-53. Multiple sclerosis is
associated with alterations in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function.
Michelson D, Stone L, Galliven E, Magiakou MA, Chrousos GP, Sternberg EM, Gold
PW "Compared to matched controls, patients with MS had significantly higher
plasma cortisol levels at baseline. Despite this hypercortisolism and in
contrast to patients with depression who had similar elevations in plasma
cortisol levels, patients with MS showed normal, rather than blunted, plasma
ACTH responses to ovine CRH, suggesting that the pathophysiology of
hypercortisolism in MS is different from that in depression." "Taken together,
these findings are compatible with data from studies of experimental animals
exposed to chronic inflammatory stress, which showed mild increased activation
of the HPA axis with increased relative activity of AVP in the regulation of
the pituitary-adrenal axis."

Exp Neurol 1977 Oct;57(1):142-57. Tryptophan availability: relation to
elevated brain serotonin in developmentally protein-malnourished rats. Miller
M, Leahy JP, Stern WC, Morgane PJ, Resnick O.

Am J Physiol 1989 Oct;257(4 Pt 2):H1192-9. Lung injury caused by cobra venom
factor is reduced in rats raised on an essential fatty acid-deficient diet.
Morganroth ML, Schoeneich SO, Till GO, Pickett W, Ward PA.

Eur J Haematol 2000 Jul;65(1):82-3. More on the relationship between cystic
fibrosis and venous thrombosis. Mori PG, Acquila M, Bicocchi MP, Bottini F,
Romano L. Letter

Acta Neurol Scand 1982 Oct;66(4):497-504, Platelet aggregation and multiple
sclerosis. Neu IS, Prosiegel M, Pfaffenrath V Measurements of blood platelet
aggregation were carried out in 30 patients suffering from multiple sclerosis
(MS) and in 15 healthy individuals. Compared with the control group, the MS
patients showed an increase in both spontaneous and induced (ADP and
serotonin) platelet aggregation. The possible pathogenetic significance of
these results is discussed.

Neurology 1975 Aug;25(8):713-6. Schwann cells and regenerated peripheral
myelin in multiple sclerosis: an ultrastructural study. Ogata J, Feigin I
Tissue of a multiple sclerosis plaque in the brachium conjunctivum of the pons
known to contain peripheral myelin by light microscopic studies were removed
from the paraffin block and processed for electron microscopic studies. The
cells related to the peripheral myelin possessed the ultrastructural
characteristics of Schwann cells, with basement membranes and associated
collagen fibers. No continuity was seen with the peripheral within the central
nervous tissues by selective maturation of multipotential primitive reticular
cells, a phenomenon consistent with the view that Schwann cells are
mesenchymal in character.

Tohoku J Exp Med 1999 Dec;189(4):259-65. Elevated plasma level of plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple
sclerosis. Onodera H, Nakashima I, Fujihara K, Nagata T, Itoyama Y "Multiple
sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous
system and one of the earliest changes in inflammatory focus involves the
activation of vascular endothelial cells." "The level of plasma PAI-1 was
significantly higher in active MS cases when compared to stable MS and
controls." "These results suggested that PAI-1 plasma levels are associated
with MS disease activity and is a good marker for MS relapse."

J Mol Med 1997 Mar;75(3):174-86. The role of nitric oxide in multiple
sclerosis. Parkinson JF, Mitrovic B, Merrill JE "Elevated nitric oxide bio-
synthesis has been associated with nonspecific immune-mediated cellular
cytotoxicity and the pathogenesis of chronic, inflammatory autoimmune diseases
including rheumatoid arthritis, insulin-dependent diabetes, inflammatory bowel
disease, and multiple sclerosis."

Fed Proc 1987 Jan;46(1):91-6. Role of the clotting system in the pathogenesis
of neuroimmunologic disease. Paterson PY, Koh CS, Kwaan HC "Our studies of the
clotting system and ensuing fibrinolysis implicate coagulation and cleavage of
fibrin within or on the luminal surface of the cerebrovasculature as events
initiating the inflammation characterizing EAE." "We postulate that the
critical event precipitating EAE is binding of circulating MBP-reactive immune
effector cells to MBP immunodeterminants on the surface of cerebrovascular
endothelial cells. Coagulation and ensuing fibrinolysis occur at sites of
binding of effector cells to cerebrovascular endothelium. Release of
biologically active peptides cleaved from fibrin open the BBB, thereby setting
the stage for the cascade of inflammatory events culminating in clinical
manifestations of EAE."

Neurotoxicology 1998 Aug-Oct;19 (4-5):599-603. In vitro effect of the cysteine
metabolites homocysteic acid, homocysteine and cysteic acid upon human
neuronal cell lines. Parsons RB, Waring RH, Ramsden DB, Williams AC "Cysteine
(CYS) is a non-essential amino acid which elicits excitotoxic properties via
the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of the glutamate receptor.. CYS levels
are known to be elevated in association with neurological disease such as
Alzheimers Disease (AD) and Parkinsons Disease (PD)." "These results show that
toxic responses are cell-type specific for CYS and its metabolites and this
may be reflected in the patterns of neurodegeneration observed in such
diseases as AD and PD."

WMJ 1983 Mar-Apr;55(2):146-50. [Effect of tryptophan excess in a diet on amino
acid composition of skin collagen and on an initial stage of protein
biosynthesis in rat liver]. Pechenova TN, Sushkova VV, Solodova EV, Gulyi MF
Protein deficiency and tryptophane load against its background lead to the
acid-soluble collagen synthesis in the rat skin. The amino acid composition of
the collagen differs from the norm. This is accompanied by changes in the free
amino acid pool of blood serum and liver, under tryptophane load the free
amino acids pool of the liver increasing twice as high. At the same time
protein deficiency increases and tryptophane load decreases the level of tRNA
amino acylation with tryptophane in the animal liver. Thus, protein deficiency
and tryptophane load against its background cause deep changes in the protein
biosynthesis.

Fed Proc 1987 Jan;46(1):91-6. Role of the clotting system in the pathogenesis
of neuroimmunologic disease. Paterson PY, Koh CS, Kwaan HC "Our studies of the
clotting system and ensuing fibrinolysis implicate coagulation and cleavage of
fibrin within or on the luminal surface of the cerebrovasculature as events
initiating the inflammation characterizing EAE." "We postulate that the
critical event precipitating EAE is binding of circulating MBP-reactive immune
effector cells to MBP immunodeterminants on the surface of cerebrovascular
endothelial cells. Coagulation and ensuing fibrinolysis occur at sites of
binding of effector cells to cerebrovascular endothelium. Release of
biologically active peptides cleaved from fibrin open the BBB, thereby setting
the stage for the cascade of inflammatory events culminating in clinical
manifestations of EAE."

Rev Esp Fisiol 1983 Mar;39(1):39-44. Intralipid and free plasmatic tryptophan
in vitro. Pena JM, Aulesa C, Vinas O, Bosch J, Farriol M, Schwartz S "In an
attempt to investigate the role of the lipidic emulsion Intralipid in the
development of metabolic encephalopathy in a patient showing high free
tryptophan levels, the relationship between lipidic emulsion and free
tryptophan was examined in in vitro experiments. The addition of intralipid to
normal serum produces an immediate increase in non-esterified fatty acids and
a parallel rise in free tryptophan. Moreover, when serum with intralipid is
incubated at 37 degrees C, the lipases release new non-esterified fatty acids
and the free tryptophan increases proportionally." "It is concluded that
intralipid causes an increase in free tryptophan levels. It is known that in
vivo free tryptophan modulates 5-hydroxytryptamine synthesis and thus may be
considered a possible causal agent for encephalopathy."

Med Hypotheses 1980 May;6(5):545-557. Fatty acids, fibrinogen and blood flow:
a general mechanism for hyperfibrinogenemia and its pathologic consequences.
Pickart LR, Thaler MM Plasma fibrinogen is elevated in various stressful
states and conditions in which active mobilization of free fatty acids (FFA)
occurs. Reduction of plasma FFA by an assortment of hypolipidemic drugs is
consistently followed by a decrease in the accompanying hyperfibrinogenemia. A
direct link between FFA and fibrinogen has been demonstrated in animals, and
in experiments employing incubated liver slices. Based on these clinical and
experimental observations, we postulate that hepatic fibrinogen synthesis is
stimulated by FFA. Since fibrinogen is a major determinant of whole blood
viscosity, erythrocyte aggregation, and sludging of red cells in terminal and
pre-terminal blood vessels, we propose that microcirculatory blood flow may be
impaired in the presence of chronically elevated plasma FFA levls.
Consequently, hypolipidemic drugs may be effective in prevention of
circulatory complications associated with FFA-induced hyperfibrinogenemia.

Neurologia 1996 Aug-Sep;11(7):272. [Exacerbation of spasticity induced by
serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Letter]. del Real MA, Hernandez A, Vaamonde J,
Gudin M

J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1997 Mar;62(3):282-4. Ondansetron, a 5-HT3
antagonist, improves cerebellar tremor. Rice GP, Lesaux J, Vandervoort P,
Macewan L, Ebers GC. "It has been previously shown that ondansetron, a 5-HT3
antagonist, can ameliorate vertigo in patients with acute brainstem disorders.
A coincidental benefit was the improvement of cerebellar tremor in some
patients with both vertigo and tremor. To further evaluate this effect, a
placebo controlled, double blind, crossover study was conducted of a single
dose of intravenous ondansetron in 20 patients with cerebellar tremor caused
by multiple sclerosis, cerebellar degeneration, or drug toxicity." "Thirteen
of 19 patients were deemed to have improved spiral copying after treatment
with ondansetron when compared with baseline performance."

Neurologia 1993 Oct;8(8):252-5. [Retinal periphlebitis in multiple sclerosis.
A prospective study]. Rio J, Colin A, Salvador F, Tintore M, Viguera ML,
Montalban J, Codina A "In three cases (12.5%) retinal periphlebitis was
observed." "Given the absence of myelin in the retina, the presence of retinal
periphlebitis suggests the existence of a vascular mechanism in the
pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis."

Int J Neurosci 1995 Dec;83(3-4):187-98. Premenstrual exacerbation of symptoms
in multiple sclerosis is attenuated by treatment with weak electromagnetic
fields. Sandyk R. "The present report concerns two women with chronic
progressive stage MS who experienced, coincident with increasing functional
disability, regular worsening of their symptoms beginning about a week before
menstruation and abating with the onset of menstruation. These symptoms
resolved two months after the initiation of treatment with EMFs."

J Physiol Biochem 1998 Dec;54(4):229-37. The role of nitric oxide in the
pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis. Santiago E, Perez-Mediavilla LA, Lopez-
Moratalla N "The inducible NOS (iNOS) is associated with the development of a
number of autoimmune diseases." "Induction of the enzyme is effected by
proinflammatory cytokines, immunomodulating peptides, and even beta-endorphin
through a mechanism involving an increase in cAMP. An excessive production of
NO has been implicated in the severe lesions observed in multiple sclerosis
(MS)."

J Neurol 1980 Jan;222(3):177-82. Cerebrospinal fluid lipids in demyelinating
disease. II. Linoleic acid as an index of impaired blood-CSF barrier. Seidel
D, Heipertz R, Weisner B "The linoleic acid content of control CSF (1.6 +/-
0.8 nMol/ml) is considerably lower than the corresponding serum value (2.5--
4.1 muMol/ml). Although CSF from MS patients contains a significantly higher
linoleic acid concentration than controls the close correlation between CSF
linoleic acid and CSF albumin is maintained. The high CSF concentration of
cholesterol esters rich in linoleic acid, which are abundant in serum but
represent only traces in CNS lipids, points towards an impaired BBB function
as the cause of CSF linoleic increase. We are able to show that both albumin
and linoleic acid are suitable as "serum markers...."

J Neurol Sci 1987 Feb;77(2-3):147-52. Chronic periphlebitis retinae in
multiple sclerosis. A histopathological study. Shaw PJ, Smith NM, Ince PG,
Bates D Retinal periphlebitis in multiple sclerosis is of particular interest
in relation to our understanding of the pathogenesis of the demyelinating
central nervous system plaques. Previous studies have largely been clinical,
and there is little detailed histopathological information relating to this
condition. We present the first detailed report in the neurological literature
on the histological findings in chronic periphlebitis retinae associated with
multiple sclerosis. The most significant abnormalities of the affected retinal
veins were the presence of thick laminated collagen in the wall, associated
with a scanty infiltration of plasma cells.

Am Heart J 2000 Aug;140(2):212-8. Low intracellular magnesium levels promote
platelet-dependent thrombosis in patients with coronary artery disease.
Shechter M, Merz CN, Rude RK, Paul Labrador MJ, Meisel SR, Shah PK, Kaul S.

J Neurochem 1996 Mar;66(3):1157-66. Mast cell activation causes delayed
neurodegeneration in mixed hippocampal cultures via the nitric oxide pathway.
Skaper SD, Facci L, Romanello S, Leon A. "Neurotoxicity required a prolonged
period (12 h) of mast cell incubation, and appeared to depend largely on
elaboration of the free radical nitric oxide by astrocytes." "Myelin basic
protein and 17 beta-estradiol had a synergistic action on the induction of
mast cell-associated neuronal injury." "Further, palmitoylethanolamide, which
has been reported to reduce mast cell activation by a local autacoid
mechanism, decreased neuron loss resulting from mast cell stimulation in the
mixed cultures but not that caused by direct cytokine induction of astrocytic
nitric oxide synthase." "These results support the notion that brain mast
cells could participate in the pathophysiology of chronic neurodegenerative
and inflammatory diseases of the nervous system, and suggest that down-
modulation of mast cell activation in such conditions could be of therapeutic
benefit."

International Journal of Microcirculation--Clinical and Experimental, 1996,
Vol 16, Iss 5, pp 266-270. Hyperventilation enhances transcapillary diffusion
of sodium fluorescein. J Steurer, D Schiesser, C Stey, W Vetter, MV Elzi, JP
Barras, UK Franzeck. "Voluntary hyperventilation (HV) provokes
hemoconcentration due to a loss of fluid from the intravascular space." "The
exact, mechanism of enhanced transcapillary diffusion of Na fluorescein is not
known, The distinct increase in FLI without a significant change in
microvascular skin flux suggests an HV-induced increase in capillary pressure
or an enhancement in capillary permeability for water and small solutes."

Kidney Int 1992 May;41(5):1245-53. Essential fatty acid deficiency normalizes
function and histology in rat nephrotoxic nephritis. Takahashi K, Kato T,
Schreiner GF, Ebert J, Badr KF.

Arthritis Rheum 1981 Aug;24 (8):1054-6. Sex steroid hormones and systemic
lupus erythematosus. Talal N.

Clin Rheum Dis 1982 Apr;8(1):23-8. Sex hormones and modulation of immune
response in SLE. Talal N.

Ann N Y Acad Sci 1986;475:320-8. Hormonal approaches to immunotherapy of
autoimmune disease. Talal N, Ahmed SA, Dauphinee M.

Ann Nucl Med 1998 Apr;12(2):89-94. Clinical significance of reduced cerebral
metabolism in multiple sclerosis: a combined PET and MRI study. Sun X, Tanaka
M, Kondo S, Okamoto K, Hirai S "The severity of cerebral hypometabolism was
also related to the number of relapses." "Our results suggest that measurement
of cerebral metabolism in MS has the potential to be an objective marker for
monitoring disease activity and to provide prognostic information."

Fed Proc 1987 Jan;46(1):118-26. Pathway to carrageenan-induced inflammation in
the hind limb of the rat. Vinegar R, Truax JF, Selph JL, Johnston PR, Venable
AL, McKenzie KK "Antiserotonin agents inhibited the hypoalgesia and part of
the edema. These findings and histological observations suggested that dermal
mast cells were injured by C. The hyperalgesia and part of the edema were
sensitive to arachidonate cyclooxygenase inhibitors (AACOIs). It is speculated
that injured mast cells metabolize arachidonic acid and reactive
intermediates, not prostaglandins, mediate the NPIR hyperalgesia and part of
the edema." "Arachidonic acid metabolism by neutrophils is speculated to
produce the mediators of phagocytic inflammatory (PI) edema and hyperalgesia."

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

