![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Natural Estrogens**  

The fact that an extremely large number of naturally occurring compounds, and
an unlimited number of synthetic compounds, have an estrogen-like activity has
been exploited by the drug companies to produce patented proprietary drugs,
especially the contraceptives.

The promotion of natural estrogens is a new marketing strategy that
capitalizes on the immense promotional investment of the drug companies in the
concept of estrogen replacement as therapy.  

=============================  

**Whether weak or strong, the estrogenic response of a chemical, if not
overcome, will add extra estrogenic burden to the system. At elevated doses,
natural estrogens and environmental estrogen-like chemicals are known to
produce adverse effects. The source of extra or elevated concentration of
estrogen could be either endogenous or exogenous.** The potential of exposure
for humans and animals to environmental estrogen-like chemicals is high.

D. Roy, et al., 1997

=================================

Estrogen marketing has entered a new phase, based on the idea of specific
estrogen-receptor modulators, the idea that a molecule can be designed which
has estrogen's good qualities without its bad qualities. This specific
molecule will be good for the bones, the heart, and the brain, without
causing cancer of the breast and uterus, according to the estrogen industry.
Meanwhile, soybeans are said to contain estrogens that meet that goal, and it
is often said that natural estrogens are better than synthetic estrogens
because they are balanced.  

Estrogen's effects on cells are immediate and profound, independent of the
estrogen receptors.  

Japanese women's relative freedom from breast cancer is independent of soy
products **:** traditional soy foods aren't the same as those so widely used
in the US, for example, soy sauce doesn't contain the so-called soy estrogens,
and tea is used much more commonly in Japan than in the US, and contains
health protective ingredients. The estrogenic and antioxidant polyphenolic
compounds of tea are not the protective agents (they raise the level of
estrogen), but tea's _caffeine_ is a very powerful and general anti-cancer
protectant. The influential article in _Lancet_ (D. Ingram, _Lancet_ 1997;
_350_ :990-994. Phytoestrogens and their role in breast cancer, _Breast
NEWS: Newsletter of the NHMRC National Breast Cancer Centre, Vol. 3,_ No. 2,
Winter 1997) used a method known to produce false results, namely, comparing
the phytoestrogens (found in large amounts in soybeans) in the urine of women
with or without breast cancer. For over fifty years, it has been known that
the liver excretes estrogens and other toxins from the body, and that when
(because of liver inertia) estrogen isn't excreted by the liver and kidneys,
it is retained in the body. This process was observed in both animals and
humans decades ago, and it is _also well established that estrogen itself
suppresses the detoxifying systems, causing fewer carcinogens to be excreted_
in the urine. Ingram's evidence logically would suggest that the women who
have cancer are failing to eliminate estrogens, including phytoestrogens, at a
normal rate, and so are retaining a higher percentage of the chemicals
consumed in their diets. Flavonoids and polyphenols, like our own estrogens,
suppress the detoxifying systems of the body.  

Our bodies produce estrogen in a great variety of tissues, not just in the
ovaries. Fat cells are a major source of it. The tendency to gain weight after
puberty is one of the reasons that women's estrogen levels rise with aging
throughout the reproductive years, though this isn't the basic reason for
estrogen's lifelong growing influence, even in men.  

Our diets provide very significant, if not always dangerous, amounts of
estrogen. Weak estrogens generally have the full range of harmful estrogenic
effects, and often have additional toxic effects. American women who eat soy
products undergo changes that appear to predispose them to cancer, making
their tissues even more unlike those of the relatively breast-cancer resistant
Japanese than they were before eating the soy foods.  

People under stress, or who have a thyroid deficiency, or who don't eat enough
protein, typically have elevated estrogen levels. The accumulation of the
essential fatty acids, the polyunsaturated oils, in the tissues promotes the
action of estrogen in a variety of ways, and this effect of diet tends to be
cumulative, and to be self-accelerating.  

Science is a method that helps us to avoid believing things that are wrong,
but there is a distinct herd instinct among people who work in science,
which makes it easy to believe whatever sounds plausible, if a lot of other
people are saying it is true. This is just as evident in physics as it is in
medicine. Sometimes powerful economic interests help people to change their
beliefs, for example as the insurance industry helped to convince the public
of the dangers of smoking. Two of the biggest industries in the world, the
estrogen industry and the soy bean industry, spend vast amounts of money
helping people to believe certain plausible-sounding things that help them
sell their products. Sometimes they can achieve great things just by naming
the substance.  

Estrogenicity can be defined most simply as acting the way estrogen does,
(originally, the term estrogen meant producing estrus, the female
readiness to mate) and since our natural estrogen does many things, the
definition is often, for practicality, based on the rapid changes produced in
certain female organs by estradiol, specifically, the enlargement of the
uterus by first taking up a large amount of water, and secondarily by the
multiplication of cells and the production of specific proteins. A similar
process occurring in the breast is also recognized as an important feature of
the estrogen reaction, but as we try to define just what estrogenicity is,
we see that there is something deeply wrong with this method of defining a
hormone, because we are constantly learning more about the actions of
estrogen, or of a specific form of the molecule. Calling it the female
hormone distracted attention from its many functions in the male, and led to
great confusion about its antifertility actions and its other toxicities. Many
biologists called it folliculin, because of the ovarian follicle's
significant role in its production, but the pharmaceutical industry succeeded
in naming it in relation to **_one_** of its functions, and then in extending
that idea of it as the producer of female receptivity to the even more
misleading idea that it is the female hormone. But when people speak about
the estrogenicity of a substance, they mean that it has properties that
parallel those of folliculin, the particular group of ovarian hormones that
includes estradiol, estrone, and estriol.  

Over the last 100 years, thousands of publications about estrogen's toxicity
have created a slight resistance to the consumption of the major estrogen
products. One ploy to overcoming this resistance is to call certain products
natural estrogen, as distinguished from synthetic estrogens. The **three**
**main estrogens in our bodies are estradiol, estrone, and estriol, though
there are many other minor variants on the basic molecule.** These three
estrogens, singly or in combinations, are being sold as natural estrogens,
with their virtues explained in various ways. Implicit in many of these
explanations, is the idea that these are safer than synthetics. They are
sometimes contrasted to the horse estrogen in Premarin, as if they are
better because they are like the estrogens that people produce. But it was
exactly the normal human estrogens, produced by the ovaries, that led to the
basic discoveries about the toxicity of estrogen, its ability to produce
cancer in any organ, to cause seizures, blood clots, birth defects,
accelerated aging, etc.  

Although I would suppose that a hormone from a horse might be more natural
for a person's body than a hormone from a plant, the word natural as used in
the phrases natural food store, or natural medicine, has come to be
associated strongly with things derived from plants. The health food industry,
now largely taken over by giant corporations to sell products that weren't
producing as much revenue when sold in supermarkets and drugstores, has helped
to create a culture in which botanical products are thought to be especially
good and safe. Naturally grown free-range chickens used to be favored, because
they could eat anything they wanted, but now eggs laid by factory chickens,
eating an industrial corn-and-soy diet, are from vegetarian chickens,
because the marketers know the public will favor eggs that have the vegetarian
mystique.  

Biologically active molecules have both general and specific properties.
Estrogenicity is a general property, but all molecules which have that
property also have some other specific properties. Estriol is a little more
water soluble than estrone, so it interacts with every body system in a
slightly different way, entering oily environments with slightly less ease,
etc.  

The estrogen which occurs in yeasts, estradiol, is identical to the major
human estrogen, and it is thought to have a reproductive function in yeasts,
though this isn't really understood. A feature of this molecule, and of all
other molecules that act like estrogen, is the phenolic function, an oxygen
and hydrogen group attached to a resonant benzene ring. Phenol itself is
estrogenic, and the phenolic group is so extremely common in nature that the
number of existing estrogenic substances is great, and the number of potential
molecules with estrogen-function is practically infinite.  

The phenolic group has many biological functions. For example, it commonly
functions as an antioxidant, though something which functions as an
antioxidant in one situation is often a pro-oxidant in another situation. The
molecule can have catalytic, germicidal, aromatic, neurotropic, and other
functions. But it also always has, to some degree, the estrogenic function.
This overlap of functions probably accounts for why so many plants have
significant estrogenic activity. (Natural estrogens, like other phenolics,
including the flavonoids, are also mutagenic.)  

The estrogenic properties of legumes were studied when sheep farmers found
that their sheep miscarried when they ate clover. (I think it's interesting
how this terribly toxic effect has been neglected in recent decades.) All
legumes have this property, and all parts of the plant seem to contain some of
the active chemicals. In beans, several substances have been found to
contribute to the effect. The estrogenic effects of the seed oils and the
isoflavones have been studied the most, but the well-known antithyroid actions
(again, involving the oils, the isoflavones, and other molecules found in
legumes) have an indirect estrogen-promoting action, since hypothyroidism
leads to hyperestrogenism. (Estrogens are known to be thyroid suppressors, so
the problem tends to be self-accelerating.)  

The various specific actions of the many estrogenic substances in beans and
other legumes haven't been throughly studied, but there is evidence that they
are also--like estrogen itself--both mutagenic and carcinogenic.  

The estrogen-promoting actions of soy oil apply to **all of the commonly used
polyunsaturated fatty acids. The same fatty acids that suppress thyroid
function, have estrogenic effects.**  

The isoflavones (many of which are now being promoted as antioxidants and
cancer preventives) are toxic to many organs, but they have clear estrogenic
effects, and are active not only immediately in the mature individual, but
when they are present prenatally, they cause feminization of the male
genitalia and behavior, and early maturation of the female offspring, with the
tissue changes that are known to be associated with increased incidence of
cancer.  

There are interesting associations between vegetable fiber and estrogens.
Because of my own experience in finding that eating a raw carrot daily
prevented my migraines, I began to suspect that the carrot fiber was having
both a bowel-protective and an antiestrogen effect. Several women who suffered
from premenstrual symptoms, including migraine, had their serum estrogen
measured before and after the carrot diet, and they found that the carrot
lowered their estrogen within a few days, as it relieved their symptoms.  

Undigestible fiber, if it isn't broken down by bowel bacteria, increases fecal
bulk, and tends to speed the transit of material through the intestine, just
as laxatives do. But some of these fiber materials, e.g., lignin, are
themselves estrogenic, and other fibers, by promoting bacterial growth, can
promote the conversion of harmless substances into toxins and carcinogens.
When there is a clear antiestrogen effect from dietary fiber, it seems to be
the result of accelerated transit through the intestine, speeding elimination
and preventing reabsorption of the estrogen which has been excreted in the
bile. Laxatives have this same effect on the excretion of estradiol.  

Some of the isoflavones, lignins, and other phytoestrogens are said to prevent
bowel cancer, but some of them, e.g., lignin, appear to sometimes increase its
likelihood.  

The phytoestrogens appear to pose a risk to organs besides the breast and
uterus, for example the liver, colon, and pancreas, which isn't surprising,
since estrogen is known to be carcinogenic for every tissue. And
carcinogenesis, like precancerous changes, mutations, and reduced repair of
DNA, is probably just an incidental process in the more general toxic effect
of acceleration of aging.  

**REFERENCES & ABSTRACTS**  

**"Stimulatory influence of soy protein isolate on breast secretion in pre-
and postmenopausal women,"** Petrakis NL; Barnes S; King EB; Lowenstein J;
Wiencke J; Lee MM; Miike R; Kirk M; Coward L Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0560, USA. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev, 1996 Oct, 5:10, 785-94 "Soy foods have been
reported to have protective effects against premenopausal breast cancer in
Asian women. No studies have been reported on potential physiological effects
of dietary soy consumption on breast gland function. We evaluated the
influence of the long-term ingestion of a commercial soy protein isolate on
breast secretory activity. We hypothesized that the features of nipple
aspirate fluid (NAF) of non-Asian women would be altered so as to resemble
those previously found in Asian women. At monthly intervals for 1 year, 24
normal pre- and postmenopausal white women, ages 30 to 58, underwent nipple
aspiration of breast fluid and gave blood and 24-h urine samples for
biochemical studies. No soy was administered in months 1-3 and 10-12. Between
months 4-9 the women ingested daily 38 g of soy protein isolate containing 38
mg of genistein. NAF volume, **gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP-15)
concentration** , and NAF cytology were used as biomarkers of possible effects
of soy protein isolate on the breast. In addition, plasma concentrations of
estradiol, progesterone, sex hormone binding globulin, prolactin, cholesterol,
high density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and triglycerides were measured.
Compliance was assessed by measurements of genistein and daidzein and their
metabolites in 24-h urine samples. Excellent compliance with the study
protocol was obtained. Compared with NAF volumes obtained in months 1-3, **a
2-6-fold increase in NAF volume ensued during months 4-9 in all premenopausal
women.** A minimal increase or no response was found in postmenopausal women.
No changes were found in plasma prolactin, sex hormone binding globulin,
cholesterol, high density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglyceride
concentrations. Compared with concentrations found in months 1-3 (no soy),
**plasma estradiol concentrations were elevated erratically throughout** a
"composite" menstrual cycle during the months of soy consumption. No
significant changes were seen in plasma progesterone concentrations. No
significant changes were found in plasma estrogen levels in postmenopausal
women. A moderate decrease occurred in the mean concentration of GCDFP-15 in
NAF in premenopausal women _during the months of soy ingestion._ **_Of
potential concern was the cytological detection of epithelial hyperplasia in 7
of 24 women (29.2%) during the months they were consuming soy protein isolate.
The findings did not support our a priori hypothesis. Instead, this pilot
study indicates that prolonged consumption of soy protein isolate has a
stimulatory effect on the premenopausal female breast, characterized by
increased secretion of breast fluid, the appearance of hyperplastic epithelial
cells,_ and elevated levels of plasma estradiol. **These findings are
suggestive of an estrogenic stimulus from the isoflavones genistein and
daidzein contained in soy protein isolate.  

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995 May;80(5):1685-1690 **Dietary intervention study
to assess estrogenicity of dietary soy among postmenopausal women.** Baird DD,
Umbach DM, Lansdell L, Hughes CL, Setchell KD, Weinberg CR, Haney AF, Wilcox
AJ, Mclachlan JA. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA. We tested the hypothesis
that postmenopausal women on a soy-supplemented diet show estrogenic
responses. Ninety-seven postmenopausal women were randomized to either a group
**that was provided with soy foods for 4 weeks or a control group that was
instructed to eat as usual.** Changes in urinary isoflavone concentrations
served as a measure of compliance and phytoestrogen dose. Changes in serum
FSH, LH, sex hormone binding globulin, and vaginal cytology were measured to
assess estrogenic response. **The percentage of vaginal superficial cells
(indicative of estrogenicity) increased for 19% of those eating the diet
compared with 8% of controls** (P = 0.06 when tested by ordinal logistic
regression). FSH and LH did not decrease significantly with dietary
supplementation as hypothesized, nor did sex hormone binding globulin
increase. Little change occurred in endogenous estradiol concentration or body
weight during the diet. Women with large increases in urinary isoflavone
concentrations were not more likely to show estrogenic responses than were
women with more modest increases. On the basis of published estimates of
phytoestrogen potency, a 4-week, soy-supplemented diet was expected to have
estrogenic effects on the liver and pituitary in postmenopausal women, but
estrogenic effects were not seen. At most, there was a small estrogenic effect
on vaginal cytology.  

Oncol Rep 1998 May-Jun;5(3):609-16 **Maternal genistein exposure mimics the
effects of estrogen on mammary gland development in female mouse offspring.**
Hilakivi-Clarke L, Cho E, Clarke R Lombardi Cancer Center, Research Bldg.,
Room W405, Georgetown University, 3970 Reservoir Road, NW, Washington, DC,
20007-2197, USA. **Human and animal data indicate that a high maternal
estrogen exposure during pregnancy increases breast cancer risk among
daughters. This may reflect an increase in the epithelial structures** that
are the sites for malignant transformation, i.e., terminal end buds (TEBs),
and a reduction in epithelial differentiation in the mammary gland. Some
**phytoestrogens, such as genistein which is a major component in soy-based
foods, and zearalenone, a mycotoxin found in agricultural products, have
estrogenic effects on the reproductive system, breast and brain.** The present
study examined whether in utero exposure to genistein or zearalenone
influences mammary gland development. Pregnant mice were injected daily with
i) 20 ng estradiol (E2); ii) 20 microg genistein; iii) 2 microg zearalenone;
iv) 2 microg tamoxifen (TAM), a partial estrogen receptor agonist; or v) oil-
vehicle between days 15 and 20 of gestation. E2, **genistein, zearalenone, and
tamoxifen all increased the density of TEBs in the mammary glands. Genistein
reduced, and zearalenone increased, epithelial differentiation.** Zearalenone
also increased epithelial density, when compared with the vehicle-controls.
None of the treatments had permanent effects on circulating E2 levels.
**Maternal exposure to E2 accelerated body weight gain, physical maturation
(eyelid opening), and puberty onset (vaginal opening) in the female offspring.
Genistein and tamoxifen had similar effects on puberty onset than E2.**
Zearalenone caused persistent cornification of the estrus smears. These
findings indicate that **maternal exposure to physiological doses of genistein
mimics the effects of E2 on the mammary gland and reproductive systems in the
offspring. Thus, our results suggest that genistein acts as an estrogen in
utero, and may increase the incidence of mammary tumors if given through a
pregnant mother.** The estrogenic effects of zearalenone on the mammary gland,
in contrast, are probably counteracted by the permanent changes in estrus
cycling.  

**[The effects on the thyroid gland of soybeans administered experimentally in
healthy subjects]** Ishizuki Y; Hirooka Y; Murata Y; Togashi K Nippon Naibunpi
Gakkai Zasshi, 1991 May 20, 67:5, 622-9 To elucidate whether soybeans would
suppress the thyroid function in healthy adults, we selected 37 subjects who
had never had goiters or serum antithyroid antibodies. They were given 30g of
soybeans everyday and were divided into 3 groups subject to age and duration
of soybean administration. In group 1, 20 subjects were given soybeans for 1
month. Groups 2 and 3 were composed of 7 younger subjects (mean 29 y.o.) and
10 elder subjects (mean 61 y.o.) respectively, and the subjects belonging to
these groups received soybeans for 3 months. The Wilcoxon-test and t-test were
used in the statistical analyses. In all groups, the various parameters of
serum thyroid hormones remained unchanged by taking soybeans, however TSH
levels rose significantly although they stayed within normal ranges. The TSH
response after TRH stimulation in group 3 revealed a more significant increase
than that in group 2, although inorganic iodide levels were lowered during the
administration of the soybeans. We have not obtained any significant
correlation between serum inorganic iodide and TSH. Hypometabolic symptoms
(malaise, constipation, sleepiness) and goiters appeared in half the subjects
in groups 2 and 3 after taking soybeans for 3 months, but they disappeared 1
month after the cessation of soybean ingestion. These findings suggested that
excessive soybean ingestion for a certain duration might suppress thyroid
function and cause goiters in healthy people, especially elderly subjects.  

Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 1996;104 Suppl 4:41-5 **Iodolactones and
iodoaldehydes--mediators of iodine in thyroid autoregulation.** Dugrillon A
Central Clinical Laboratory, University of Heidelberg, Germany. Within the
last decades multiple iodolipid-classes have been identified in thyroid
tissue. For a long time they have been supposed to be involved in thyroid
autoregulation, but for the time being no specific compounds could be
isolated. A new approach was stimulated by the finding that **thyroid cells
were able to iodinate polyunsaturated fatty acids** to form iodolactones and
by the identification of alpha-iodohexadecanal (alpha-IHDA) as the major
compound of an iodolipid fraction.  

**Plasma free fatty acids, inhibitor of extrathyroidal conversion of T4 to T3
and thyroid hormone binding inhibitor in patients with various nonthyroidal
illnesses.** Suzuki Y; Nanno M; Gemma R; Yoshimi T Endocrinol Jpn, 1992 Oct,
39:5, 445-53.  

**[Endemic goiter in Austria. Is iodine deficiency the primary cause of
goiter?]** Grubeck-Loebenstein B; Kletter K; Kiss A; Vierhapper H; Waldhäusl W
Schweiz Med Wochenschr, 1982 Oct 30, 112:44, 1526-30 **In spite of government-
regulated iodide admixture to table salt, the incidence of goiter is still
high in Austria.** Iodine excretion and thyroid function were therefore
investigated in 80 patients suffering from ordinary goiter in whom thyroid
size and resulting symptoms had increased lately. 25 euthyroid non-goitrous
subjects served as controls. 48% of the goitrous patients investigated
presented with iodine excretion of less than 70 micrograms/24 h, suggesting an
insufficient iodine supply. Thyroid I131 uptake, basal and TRH-stimulated
plasma TSH concentrations, and serum T3 levels were higher, whereas serum T4
levels were lower in these patients than in goitrous patients with higher
iodine excretion and non-goitrous controls. Iodine deficiency thus appears to
be of pathogenetic relevance in about half of the goitrous Austrian
population. **Other factors enhancing goiter development seem to assume
particular importance in goitrous patients with a sufficient iodine supply.**

**Biochemical and molecular changes at the cellular level in response to
exposure to environmental estrogen-like chemicals.** Roy D; Palangat M; Chen
CW; Thomas RD; Colerangle J; Atkinson A; Yan ZJ Environmental Toxicology
Program, University of Alabama, Birmingham 35294, USA. J Toxicol Environ
Health, 1997 Jan, 50:1, 1-29. Estrogen-like chemicals are unique compared to
nonestrogenic xenobiotics, because in addition to their chemical properties,
the estrogenic property of these compounds allows them to act like sex
hormones. **Whether weak or strong, the estrogenic response of a chemical, if
not overcome, will add extra estrogenic burden to the system. At elevated
doses, natural estrogens and environmental estrogen-like chemicals are known
to produce adverse effects. The source of extra or elevated concentration of
estrogen could be either endogenous or exogenous.** The potential of exposure
for humans and animals to environmental estrogen-like chemicals is high. Only
a limited number of estrogen-like compounds, such as diethylstilbestrol (DES),
bisphenol A, nonylphenol, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), have been used to assess the
biochemical and molecular changes at the cellular level. Among them, DES is
the most extensively studied estrogen-like chemical, and therefore this
article is focused mainly on DES-related observations. In addition to
estrogenic effects, environmental estrogen-like chemicals **produce multiple
and multitype genetic and/or nongenetic hits.** Exposure of Syrian hamsters to
stilbene estrogen (DES) produces several changes in the nuclei of target organ
for carcinogenesis (kidney): (1) Products of nuclear redox reactions of DES
modify transcription regulating proteins and DNA; (2) transcription is
inhibited; (3) tyrosine phosphorylation of nuclear proteins, including RNA
polymerase II, p53, and nuclear insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor, is
altered; and (4 **) DNA repair gene DNA polymerase beta transcripts are
decreased and mutated.** Exposure of Noble rats to DES also produces several
changes in the mammary gland: proliferative activity is drastically altered;
the cell cycle of mammary epithelial cells is perturbed; telomeric length is
attenuated; etc. It appears that some other estrogenic compounds, such as
bisphenol A and nonylphenol, may also follow a similar pattern of effects to
DES, because we have recently shown that these compounds **alter cell cycle
kinetics, produce telomeric associations, and produce chromosomal
aberrations.** Like DES, bisphenol A after metabolic activation is capable of
binding to DNA. However, it should be noted that a particular or multitype
hit(s) will depend upon the nature of the environmental estrogen-like
chemical. The role of individual attack leading to a particular change is not
clear at this stage. Consequences of these multitypes of attack on the nuclei
of cells could be (1) nuclear toxicity/cell death; (2) repair of all the hits
and then acting as normal cells; or (3) sustaining most of the hits and acting
as unstable cells. Proliferation of the last type of cell is expected to
result in transformed cells.  

**Potential adverse effects of phytoestrogens.** Whitten PL; Lewis C; Russell
E; Naftolin F Department of Anthropology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322.
J Nutr, 1995 Mar, 125:3 Suppl, 771S-776S Evaluation of the potential benefits
and risks offered by naturally occurring plant estrogens requires
investigation of their potency and sites of action when consumed at natural
dietary concentrations. Our investigations have examined the effects of a
range of natural dietary concentrations of the most potent plant isoflavonoid,
coumestrol, using a rat model and a variety of estrogen-dependent tissues and
endpoints. Treatments of immature **females demonstrated agonistic action in
the reproductive tract, brain, and pituitary at natural dietary
concentrations. Experiments designed to test for estrogen antagonism
demonstrated that coumestrol did not conform to the picture of a classic
antiestrogen.** However, coumestrol did suppress estrous cycles in adult
females. Developmental actions were examined by neonatal exposure of pups
through milk of rat dams fed a coumestrol, control, or commercial soy-based
diet during the critical period of the first 10 postnatal days or throughout
the 21 days of lactation. The 10-day treatment did not significantly alter
adult estrous cyclicity, but the 21-day treatment produced in a **persistent
estrus state in coumestrol-treated females by 132 days of age.** In contrast,
the 10-day coumestrol treatments produced **significant deficits in the sexual
behavior of male offspring.** These findings illustrate the broad range of
actions of these natural estrogens and the variability in potency across
endpoints. This variability argues for the importance of fully characterizing
each phytoestrogen in terms of its sites of action, balance of agonistic and
antagonistic properties, natural potency, and short-term and long-term
effects.  

Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987 Aug;157(2):312-317 **Age-related changes in the
female hormonal environment during reproductive life.** Musey VC, Collins DC,
Musey PI, Martino-Saltzman D, Preedy JR. Previous studies have indicated that
serum levels of follicle-stimulating hormone rise with age during the female
reproductive life, but the effect on other hormones is not clear. We studied
the effects of age, independent of pregnancy, by comparing serum hormone
levels in two groups of nulliparous, **premenopausal women aged 18 to 23 and
29 to 40 years. We found that increased age during reproductive life is
accompanied by a significant rise in both basal and stimulated serum follicle-
stimulating hormone levels. This was accompanied by an increase in the serum
level of estradiol-17 beta and the urine levels of estradiol-17 beta and 17
beta-estradiol-17-glucosidurona te.** The serum level of estrone sulfate
decreased with age. Serum and urine levels of other estrogens were unchanged.
The basal and stimulated levels of luteinizing hormone were also unchanged.
There was a significant decrease in basal and stimulated serum prolactin
levels. Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate decreased with age, but serum testosterone was unchanged. It is
concluded that significant age-related changes in the female hormonal
environment occur during the reproductive years.  

Rodriguez, P; Fernandez-Galaz, C; Tejero, A. **Controlled neonatal exposure to
estrogens: A suitable tool for reproductive aging studies in the female rat.**
Biology of Reproduction, v.49, n.2, (1993): 387-392. The present study was
designed to determine whether the modification of exposure time to large doses
of estrogens provided a reliable model for early changes in reproductive
aging. Silastic implants containing estradiol benzoate (EB) in solution were
placed into 5-day-old female Wistar rats and removed 1 day (Ei1 group) or 5
days (Ei5) later. In addition, 100 mu-g EB dissolved in 100 mu-l corn oil was
administered s.c. to another group (EI). Control rats received either vehicle
implants or 100 mu-l corn oil. Premature occurrence of vaginal opening was
observed in all three estrogenized groups independently of EB exposure.
However, females bearing implants for 24 h had first estrus at the same age as
their controls and cycled regularly, and neither histological nor gonadal
alterations could be observed at 75 days.. Interestingly, they failed to cycle
regularly at 5 mo whereas controls continued to cycle. On the other hand, the
increase of EB exposure (Ei5, EI) resulted in a gradual and significant delay
in the onset of first estrus and in a high number of estrous phases, as
frequently observed during reproductive decline. At 75 days, the ovaries of
these last two groups showed a reduced number of corpora lutea and an
increased number of large follicles. According to this histological pattern,
ovarian weight and **progesterone (P) content gradually decreased whereas both
groups showed higher estradiol (E-2) content** than controls. This resulted in
**a higher E-2:P ratio, comparable to that observed in normal aging rats.**
The results allow us to conclude that the exposure time to large doses of
estrogens is critical to the gradual enhancement of reproductive decline.
Furthermore, exposures as brief as 24 h led to a potential early model for
aging studies that will be useful to verify whether neuroendocrine changes
precede gonadal impairment.  

Cancer Lett 1992 Oct 30;67(1):55-59 **Evidence of hypothalamic involvement in
the mechanism of transplacental carcinogenesis by diethylstilbestrol.** Smith
DA, Walker BE Anatomy Department, Michigan State University, East Lansing
48824-1316. Disruption of hypothalamic sex differentiation in the fetus is one
hypothesis to explain female reproductive system anomalies and cancer arising
from prenatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES). To further test this
hypothesis, breeding performance and behavior were monitored in a colony of
mice exposed prenatally to DES, using a schedule previously shown to produce
anomalies and cancer of the female reproductive system. **Fertility decreased
with age more rapidly in DES-exposed females than in control females.** DES-
exposed females were less accepting of the male than control females. These
observations support the hypothesis of abnormal hypothalamic sex
differentiation as a basic mechanism in DES transplacental carcinogenesis.  

Int J Cancer 1980 Aug;26(2):241-6 **The influence of the lipid composition of
the feed given to mice on the immunocompetence and tumour resistance of the
progeny.** Boeryd B, Hallgren B. In inbred CBA mice, the immunocompetence of
adult progeny from breeding pairs fed three different diets was compared.
**Substitution of soy oil for animal fat in the feed of the mice during
gestation or lactation significantly decreased the PFC response to SRBC in the
adult offspring.** Addition of 2-methoxy-substituted glycerol ethers to the
feed of mothers deprived of animal fat during lactation partly restored the
PFC response of the male offspring. In the adult mice fed differently pre- and
perinatally the resistance to a transplanted syngeneic sarcoma was similar.
The growth of offspring from mice fed the three diets was similar. In mice
deprived of animal fat at weaning and for the following 21 days the immune
reactivity to SRBC, tested about 3 months after stopping the diet, was not
influenced. However, the resistance to a transplanted tumour in similarly fed
mice was increased and this resistance was brought approximately to the
control level by methoxy-substituted glycerol ethers.

Cancer Res 1987 Mar 1;47(5):1333-8. **Effects of dietary fats and soybean
protein on azaserine-induced pancreatic carcinogenesis and plasma
cholecystokinin in the rat.** Roebuck BD, Kaplita PV, Edwards BR, Praissman M
**Both dietary unsaturated fat and raw soybean products are known to enhance
pancreatic carcinogenesis when fed during the postinitiation phase. A
comparison of these two dietary components was made to** evaluate the relative
potency of each ingredient for enhancing pancreatic carcinogenesis and to
determine if this enhancement was correlated with an increase in plasma
cholecystokinin (CCK) levels. Male Wistar rats were initiated with a single
dose of azaserine (30 mg/kg body weight) at 14 days of age. The rats were
weaned to test diets formulated from purified ingredients. Dietary protein at
20% by weight was either casein or soy protein isolate (heat treated or raw)..
Corn oil was the unsaturated fat of major interest and it was fed at either 5
or 20% by weight. Pancreases were quantitatively evaluated for carcinogen-
induced lesions at 2- and 4-month postinitiation. In a second experiment
designed to closely mimic the above experiment, rats were implanted with
cannulae which allowed plasma to be repetitively sampled over a 2.5-week
period during which the test diets were fed. Plasma was collected both prior
to introduction of the test diets and afterwards. Plasma CCK was measured by a
specific radioimmunoassay. Both the 20% corn oil diet and the raw soy protein
isolate diet enhanced pancreatic carcinogenesis. The effects of the raw soy
protein isolate on the growth of the carcinogen-induced lesions were
significantly greater than the effects of the 20% corn oil diet. Plasma CCK
values were not elevated in the rats fed the 20% corn oil diet, but they were
significantly elevated in the rats fed the raw soy protein isolate. Heat-
treated soy protein isolate neither enhanced carcinogenesis nor elevated the
plasma CCK level. This **study demonstrates that certain plant proteins
enhance the growth of carcinogen-induced pancreatic foci and that this effect
is considerably greater than the enhancement by high levels of dietary
unsaturated fat. Furthermore, the enhancement by the raw soy protein isolate
may be mediated by CCK; but this does not appear to be the mechanism by which
the unsaturated fat, corn oil, enhances pancreatic carcinogenesis.**  

J Biol Chem 1988 Mar 15;263(8):3639-3645 **Dynamic pattern of estradiol
binding to uterine receptors of the rat.** **Inhibition and stimulation by
unsaturated fatty acids.** Vallette G, Christeff N, Bogard C, Benassayag C,
Nunez E  

J Biol Chem 1986 Feb 25;261(6):2954-2959 **Modifications of the properties of
human sex steroid-binding protein by nonesterified fatty acids.** Martin ME,
Vranckx R, Benassayag C, Nunez EA The effect of unsaturated and saturated
nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs) on the electrophoretic, immunological, and
steroid-binding properties of human sex hormone-binding protein (SBP) were
investigated. Tests were carried out on whole serum from pregnant women and on
purified SBP using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, crossed
immunoelectrophoresis with autoradiography, and equilibrium dialysis. All
three methods showed that NEFAs influence the binding of sex steroids to SBP
both in whole serum and with the purified protein. Saturated NEFAs caused a
1.5-2-fold increase in binding of **dehydrotestosterone, testosterone, and
estradiol to SBP, while unsaturated NEFAs, such as oleic (18:1) and
docosahexaenoic (22:6) acids inhibited the binding of these steroids to SBP.
Thus, unsaturated NEFAs** in the concentration range 1-100 microM are more
inhibitory for estradiol binding than for testosterone or dehydrotestosterone
binding. In addition to these binding changes, polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and immunoelectrophoretic studies revealed a shift in SBP from
the slow-moving active native form to a fast-moving inactive one. There was
also a reduction in the apparent SBP concentration by Laurell
immunoelectrophoresis in the presence of unsaturated NEFA (5.5 nmol of
NEFA/pmol of protein). These studies indicate that unsaturated NEFAs induce
conformational changes in human SBP which are reflected in its
electrophoretic, immunological, and steroid-binding properties. They suggest
that the fatty acid content of the SBP environment may result in lower steroid
hormone binding and thus increased free hormone levels.

J Biol Chem 1986 Feb 25;261(6):2954-2959 **Modifications of the properties of
human sex steroid-binding protein by nonesterified fatty acids.** Martin ME,
Vranckx R, Benassayag C, Nunez EA The effect of unsaturated and saturated
nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs) on the electrophoretic, immunological, and
steroid-binding properties of human sex hormone-binding protein (SBP) were
investigated. Tests were carried out on whole serum from pregnant women and on
purified SBP using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, crossed
immunoelectrophoresis with autoradiography, and equilibrium dialysis. All
three methods showed that NEFAs influence the binding of sex steroids to SBP
both in whole serum and with the purified protein. Saturated NEFAs caused a
1.5-2-fold increase in binding of **dehydrotestosterone, testosterone, and
estradiol to SBP, while unsaturated NEFAs, such as oleic (18:1) and
docosahexaenoic (22:6) acids inhibited the binding of these steroids to SBP.**
Thus, unsaturated NEFAs in the concentration range 1-100 microM are more
inhibitory for estradiol binding than for testosterone or dehydrotestosterone
binding. In addition to these binding changes, polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and immunoelectrophoretic studies revealed a shift in SBP from
the slow-moving active native form to a fast-moving inactive one. There was
also a reduction in the apparent SBP concentration by Laurell
immunoelectrophoresis in the presence of unsaturated NEFA (5.5 nmol of
NEFA/pmol of protein). These studies indicate that unsaturated NEFAs induce
conformational changes in human SBP which are reflected in its
electrophoretic, immunological, and steroid-binding properties. They suggest
that the fatty acid content of the SBP environment may result in lower steroid
hormone binding and **thus increased free hormone levels.**

J Steroid Biochem 1986 Feb;24(2):657-659 **Free fatty acids: a possible
regulator of the available oestradiol fractions in plasma.** Reed MJ, Beranek
PA, Cheng RW, James VH Consumption of dietary fats has been linked to the high
incidence of breast cancer found in Western women. In vitro studies we have
carried out show that **unsaturated free fatty acids can increase the
biologically available oestradiol fractions in plasma.** It is possible
therefore that the increased risk for breast cancer associated with a diet
high in fats may be related to an elevation in the biologically available
oestradiol fractions in plasma.

Endocrinology 1986 Jan;118(1):1-7 **Potentiation of estradiol binding to human
tissue proteins by unsaturated nonesterified fatty acids.** Benassayag C,
Vallette G, Hassid J, Raymond JP, Nunez EA Nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs)
have been recently shown in the rat to be involved in steroid hormone
expression, having effects on plasma transport and **intracellular activity.**
This study examines the influence of saturated and unsaturated NEFAs on
estradiol (E2) binding to cytosol from human uterus, breast, and melanoma.
Binding was analyzed after separation with dextran-coated charcoal or
hydroxylapatite and by sucrose density gradient centrifugation. **Unsaturated
NEFAs induced a 2- to 10-fold increase (P less than 0.001) in E2 binding to
cytosol** from normal, fibromatous, and neoplastic uteri, while saturated
NEFAs **had a slight inhibitory effect** (P less than 0.05). Similar effects
were seen with cytosol from metastatic melanoma lymph nodes and neoplastic
breast tissues. By contrast, unsaturated NEFAs did not increase E2 binding to
serum from these patients. Density gradient centrifugation indicated that the
increased binding was associated with the proteins present in the 2- to 4 S
region. Analysis of E2 metabolites in the presence of unsaturated NEFAs showed
the formation of water-soluble derivatives. Seventy percent of these E2
derivatives were trichloracetic acid precipitable, suggesting a covalent link
between the steroid and a protein. The existence of such water-soluble
metabolites could be erroneously interpreted as a true binding to soluble
cytoplasmic receptors.

Ann N Y Acad Sci 1988;538:257-264 **Possible relevance of steroid availability
and breast cancer.** Bruning PF, Bonfrer JM Netherlands Cancer Institute
(Antoni van Leeuwenhoekhuis), Amsterdam. The as yet circumstantial evidence
for a central role of estrogens in the promotion of human breast cancer is
supported by many data. However, it has not been possible to identify breast
cancer patients or women at risk by abnormally elevated estrogen levels in
plasma. **The concept of available, i.e., non-SHBG bound sex steroid seems to
offer a better understanding than total serum steroid levels do. We
demonstrated that sex steroid protein binding is decreased by free fatty
acids.**

J Surg Oncol 1993 Feb;52(2):77-82. **The effect of the fiber components
cellulose and lignin on experimental colon neoplasia.** Sloan DA, Fleiszer DM,
Richards GK, Murray D, Brown RA Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington. Sixty Sprague-Dawley rats were pair-fed one of
three nutritionally identical diets. One diet contained "low-fiber" (3.8%
crude fiber); the others contained "high fiber" (28.7% crude fiber) composed
of either cellulose or lignin. Although both "high fiber" diets had similar
stool bulking effects, **only the cellulose diet** was associated with a
reduction in 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH)-induced colon neoplasms. The
cellulose diet was also associated with distinct changes in the gut bacterial
profile and with a lowered serum cholesterol.

Nutr Cancer 1984;6(2):77-85 **Enhancement of 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced
large bowel tumorigenesis in Balb/c mice by corn, soybean, and wheat brans.**
Clapp NK, Henke MA, London JF, Shock TL This study was designed to determine
the effects of four well-characterized dietary brans on large bowel
tumorigenesis induced in mice with 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH). Eight-week-old
barrier-derived male Balb/c mice were fed a semisynthetic diet with 20% bran
added (either corn, soybean, soft winter wheat, or hard spring wheat) or a no-
fiber-added control diet. Half of each group was given DMH (20 mg/kg body
weight/week, subcutaneously for 10 weeks) beginning at 11 weeks of age.
Surviving mice were killed 40 weeks after the first DMH injection. Tumors were
not found in mice not subjected to DMH. In DMH-treated mice, tumors were found
almost exclusively in the distal colon. Tumor incidences were as follows:
**controls, 11%; soybean group, 44%; soft winter wheat group, 48%; hard spring
wheat group, 58%; and corn group, 72%.** Tumors per tumor-bearing mouse ranged
from 1.4 to 1.6, except in the corn group, which had 2.1. **A positive
correlation was found between percentage of neutral detergent fiber in the
brans and tumor incidences** but not between the individual components of
cellulose, hemicellulose, or lignin. The **enhancement of DMH-induced large
bowel tumorigenesis by all four bran types may reflect a species and/or mouse
strain effect that is bran-source related. These data emphasize the importance
of using well-defined bran in all "fiber" studies.**

Prev Med 1987 Jul;16(4):540-4 **Fiber, stool bulk, and bile acid output:
implications for colon cancer risk.** McPherson-Kay R Dietary fiber has direct
effects on stool bulk and bile acid output that may be of relevance in the
etiology of colon cancer. Most types of fiber increase the total volume of
stool and reduce the concentration of specific substances, including bile
acids, that are in contact with the bowel wall. However, fibers differ in
their effect on stool bulk, with wheat fiber being a more effective stool
bulking agent than fruit and vegetable fibers. In addition, the extent to
which a specific fiber reduces bile acid concentration will be modified by its
concomitant effects on total fecal sterol excretion. Whereas wheat bran
reduces fecal bile acid concentration, **pectin, lignin, and oat bran do not.
These three fibers significantly increase total bile acid output. Bile acids
act as promoters of colonic tumors in mutagenesis assay systems and in various
animal models.** Human epidemiological studies show a relationship between
various dietary variables, including fat and fiber intake, fecal concentration
of bile acids, and colon cancer risk.

Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1998 Jan;10(1):33-9 **Intestinal absorption of
oestrogen: the effect of altering transit-time.** Lewis SJ, Oakey RE, Heaton
KW University Department of Medicine, Bristol Royal Infirmary, UK. OBJECTIVE:
The mechanism by which a high fibre diet may reduce serum oestrogens is
unknown. We hypothesized that time is a rate-limiting factor in oestrogen
absorption from the colon so that changes in colonic transit-rate affect the
proportion of oestrogen that is deconjugated and/or absorbed. AIM: To
determine if alteration of intestinal transit rate would influence the
absorption of an oral dose of oestradiol glucuronide. PARTICIPANTS: Twenty
healthy postmenopausal women recruited by advertisement. SETTING: Department
of Medicine, Bristol Royal Infirmary. METHODS: Volunteers consumed, in turn,
wheat bran, senna, loperamide and bran shaped plastic flakes, each for 10 days
with a minimum 2 week washout period between study periods, dietary intake
being unchanged. Before and in the last 4 days of each intervention whole-gut
transit-time, defecation frequency, stool form, stool beta-glucuronidase
activity, stool pH and the absorption of a 1.5 mg dose of oestradiol
glucuronide were measured. RESULTS: Wheat bran, senna and plastic flakes led
to the intended reduction in whole-gut transit-time, increase in defecatory
frequency and increase in stool form score. Loperamide caused the opposite
effect. **The length of time the absorbed oestrogen was detectable in the
serum fell with wheat bran and senna, although this was only significant for
oestradiol.** Oestrone, but not oestradiol, was detectable for a longer time
with loperamide. Plastic flakes had no effect on either oestrogen. Areas under
the curve did not change significantly but tended to fall with the three
transit-accelerating agents and to rise with loperamide. CONCLUSION: Our data
indicate there is likely to be an effect of intestinal transit on the
absorption of oestrogens but more refined techniques are needed to
characterize this properly.

Br J Cancer 1997;76(3):395-400. **Lower serum oestrogen concentrations
associated with faster intestinal transit.** Lewis SJ, Heaton KW, Oakey RE,
McGarrigle HH University Department of Medicine, Bristol Royal Infirmary, UK.
Increased fibre intake has been shown to reduce serum oestrogen
concentrations. We hypothesized that fibre exerts this effect by decreasing
the time available for reabsorption of oestrogens in the colon. We tested this
in volunteers by measuring changes in serum oestrogen levels in response to
manipulation of intestinal transit times with senna and loperamide, then
comparing the results with changes caused by wheat bran. Forty healthy
premenopausal volunteers were placed at random into one of three groups. The
first group took senna for two menstrual cycles then, after a washout period,
took wheat bran, again for two menstrual cycles. The second group did the
reverse. The third group took loperamide for two menstrual cycles. At the
beginning and end of each intervention a 4-day dietary record was kept and
whole-gut transit time was measured; stools were taken for measurement of pH
and beta-glucuronidase activity and blood for measurement of oestrone and
oestradiol and their non-protein-bound fractions and of oestrone sulphate.
**Senna and loperamide caused the intended alterations in intestinal transit,
whereas on wheat bran supplements there was a trend towards faster transit.
Serum oestrone sulphate fell with wheat bran (mean intake 19.8 g day(-1)) and
with senna; total- and non-protein-bound oestrone fell with senna.** No
significant changes in serum oestrogens were seen with loperamide. No
significant changes were seen in faecal beta-glucuronidase activity. Stool pH
changed only with senna, in which case it fell. In conclusion, speeding up
intestinal transit can lower serum oestrogen concentrations.  

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1991 Aug;39(2):193-202 **Influence of wheat bran on
NMU-induced mammary tumor development, plasma estrogen levels and estrogen
excretion in female rats.** Arts CJ, de Bie AT, van den Berg H, van 't Veer P,
Bunnik GS, Thijssen JH TNO Toxicology and Nutrition Institute, The
Netherlands. In our animal experiments the hypothesis was tested that a high-
fiber (HF) diet reduces tumor promotion **by interruption of the enterohepatic
circulation resulting in lowered estrogen exposure of the estrogen-sensitive
tissue.** In the first experiment the development of N-nitrosomethylurea (NMU)
induced mammary tumors was investigated. One group of rats (HF) was fed a HF
diet (11% fiber, based on wheat bran), the other group (LF) fed a low-fiber
diet (0.5% fiber, based on white wheat flour). Tumor incidence (90 and 80%,
respectively) and latency (121 and 128 days, respectively) were similar in the
HF and LF groups. Compared to the LF group, HF rats had lower tumor weights
(0.16 vs 0.55 g; P less than 0.01) and a slightly lower tumor multiplicity
(1.8 vs 2.8 tumors per tumor-bearing rat). These differences were reduced
after adjustment for body weight. In a second experiment rats, not treated
with the carcinogen, were kept on the same HF and LF diets. From these rats
24-h urine and feces and orbital blood samples were **collected for analysis
of (un)conjugated estrogens. The excretion of both free and conjugated
estrogens in fecal samples was about 3-fold higher in HF rats than in LF rats.
During the basal period of the cycle urinary excretion of estrone was lower in
HF rats (mean 9.7 ng/day) than in LF rats (mean 13.0 ng/day; P less than
0.05). It is concluded that wheat bran interrupts the enterohepatic
circulation of estrogens, but plasma levels are not affected. Whether the
development of mammary tumors is reduced by the introduction of specific
components of wheat bran, or by a reduced body weight due to a lower
(effective) energy intake remains to be determined.**

Nutr Cancer 1998;31(1):24-30 **Dietary lignin, and insoluble fiber, enhance
uterine cancer but did not influence mammary cancer induced by N-methyl-N-
nitrosourea in rats.** Birt DF, Markin RS, Blackwood D, Harvell DM, Shull JD,
Pennington KL Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Disease,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 69198, USA. Previous
investigations suggested potential breast cancer-preventive properties of
dietary fiber from cabbage. The purpose of the present investigation was to
determine whether lignin, a component of cabbage fiber, would protect against
mammary carcinogenesis by N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) in Sprague-Dawley rats.
A six-week study was conducted using diets containing 0.5-5% dietary wood
lignin (a readily available, purified source). These diets were well tolerated
by the rats, and a carcinogenesis study using 5 mg MNU/100 g body wt i.v. at
50 days of age was conducted, with the 2.5% lignin diet fed from 6 through 8
weeks of age followed by 5% lignin diet until 20 weeks after MNU. Dietary
lignin and MNU treatment increased food consumption (p < 0.05), and body
weight was slightly reduced at 10 and 20 weeks after MNU in the MNU-5% lignin
diet group (p < 0.05). Serum estradiol was not altered by dietary lignin or
MNU treatment, but uterine weights were highest in the MNU-control diet group
4 and 12 weeks after MNU. Expression of creatine kinase B, an estrogen-
responsive gene, was lower in the uteri of the MNU-lignin diet group than in
other groups at 20 weeks. Mammary carcinogenesis was not altered by dietary
lignin. **However, uterine endometrial adenocarcinoma was observed only in the
MNU-lignin diet group (4 carcinomas/40 effective rats) (p < 0.05). **  

Ginecol Obstet Mex 1998 Mar;66:111-8 **[Estrogens of vegetable origin].**
[Article in Spanish] Rubio Lotvin B Reproduccion y de Ginecologia y
Obstetricia Facultad de Medicina, UNAM Depto. de Ginecologia y Obstetricia
Hospital Americano, Britanico Cowdray. Mexico, D.F. In recent years, estrogens
of vegetable origin have acquired some importance that justify the
presentation of the available data. The compounds that have estrogenic effect
when ingested as food through **vegetables include isoflavones, lignines and
lactones. The review comprises their chemical structure,** metabolism and
excretion as well as their effect on plasmatic levels of estrogens FSH, LH and
SHBG as well as their activity over lipoproteins and, naturally, their action
on menopause symptoms and breast cancer.

Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1995 Jan;208(1):6-12 **Chemical studies of
phytoestrogens and related compounds in dietary supplements: flax and
chaparral.** Obermeyer WR, Musser SM, Betz JM, Casey RE, Pohland AE, Page SW
Division of Natural Products, Food and Drug Administration, Washington,
District of Columbia 20204. High-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC) and
mass spectrometric (MS) procedures were developed to determine lignans in
flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum) and chaparral (Larrea tridentata). **Flaxseed
contains high levels of phytoestrogens. Chaparral has been associated with
acute nonviral toxic hepatitis and contains lignans that are structurally
similar to known estrogenic compounds.** Both flaxseed and chaparral products
have been marketed as dietary supplements. A mild enzyme hydrolysis procedure
to prevent the formation of artifacts in the isolation step was used in the
determination of secoisolariciresinol in flaxseed products. HPLC with
ultraviolet spectral (UV) or MS detection was used as the determinative steps.
HPLC procedures with UV detection and mass spectrometry were developed to
**characterize the phenolic components, including lignans and flavonoids,** of
chaparral and to direct fractionation studies for the bioassays.

Brain Res 1994 Jul 25;652(1):161-3 **The 21-aminosteroid antioxidant, U74389F,
prevents estradiol-induced depletion of hypothalamic beta-endorphin in adult
female rats.** Schipper HM, Desjardins GC, Beaudet A, Brawer JR Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Bloomfield Centre for Research in Aging, Jewish
General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Que., Canada. **A single
intramuscular injection of 2 mg estradiol valerate (EV) results in neuronal
degeneration** and beta-endorphin depletion in the hypothalamic arcuate
nucleus of adult female rats. We have hypothesized that peroxidase-positive
astrocytes in this brain region oxidize estrogens and catecholestrogens to
semiquinone radicals which mediate oxidative neuronal injury. In the present
study, dietary administration of the potent antioxidant 21-aminosteroid,
U-74389F, completely blocked EV-induced beta-endorphin depletion in the
hypothalami of adult female rats. Neither EV nor 21-aminosteroid treatment had
any effect on hypothalamic concentrations of neuropeptide Y and Met-
enkephalin, **confirming that the estradiol lesion is fairly selective for the
beta-endorphin cell population.** The present findings support the hypothesis
that the toxic effect of estradiol on hypothalamic beta-endorphin neurons is
mediated by free radicals.

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1998 Feb;64(3-4):207-15, **Effects of tea
polyphenols and flavonoids on liver microsomal glucuronidation of estradiol
and estrone.** Zhu BT, Taneja N, Loder DP, Balentine DA, Conney AH
Administration of 0.5 or 1% lyophilized green tea (5 or 10 mg tea solids per
ml, respectively) as the sole source of drinking fluid to female Long-Evans
rats for 18 days stimulated liver microsomal glucuronidation of estrone,
estradiol and 4-nitrophenol by 30-37%, 15-27% and 26-60%, respectively. Oral
administration of 0.5% lyophilized green tea to female CD-1 mice for 18 days
stimulated liver microsomal glucuronidation of estrone, estradiol and
4-nitrophenol by 33-37%, 12-22% and 172-191%, respectively. The in vitro
addition of a green tea polyphenol mixture, a black tea polyphenol mixture or
(-)-epigallocatechin gallate inhibited rat liver microsomal glucuronidation of
estrone and estradiol in a concentration-dependent manner and their IC50
values for inhibition of estrogen metabolism were approximately 12.5, 50 and
10 microg/ml, respectively. Enzyme kinetic analysis indicates that the
inhibition of estrone glucuronidation by 10 microM (-)-epigallocatechin
gallate was competitive while inhibition by 50 microM (-)-epigallocatechin
gallate was noncompetitive. Similarly, several flavonoids (naringenin,
hesperetin, kaempferol, quercetin, rutin, flavone, alpha-naphthoflavone and
beta-naphthoflavone) also inhibited rat liver microsomal glucuronidation of
estrone and estradiol to varying degrees. Naringenin and hesperetin displayed
the strongest inhibitory effects (IC50 value of approximately 25 microM).
These two hydroxylated flavonoids had a competitive mechanism of enzyme
inhibition for estrone glucuronidation at a 10 microM inhibitor concentration
and a predominantly noncompetitive mechanism of inhibition at a 50 microM
inhibitor concentration.

Toxicology 1997 Sep 26;122(1-2):61-72, **Effects of co-administration of
butylated hydroxytoluene, butylated hydroxyanisole and flavonoids on the
activation of mutagens and drug-metabolizing enzymes in mice.**  Sun B,
Fukuhara M Effects of co-administration of food additives and naturally
occurring food components were studied on the activation of mutagens. Male
mice (ddY) were given diets containing butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) or
butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and flavone or flavanone (2,3-dihydroflavone)
for two weeks and the ability of hepatic microsomes to activate aflatoxin B1,
benzo[a]pyrene and N-nitrosodimethylamine was determined by the mutagenicity
test. Co-administration of an antioxidant (0.1% BHT or 0.2% BHA in diet) and a
flavonoid (0.1% flavone or 0.1% flavanone) **resulted in additive effects on
the activation of aflatoxin B1 and benzo[a]pyrene,** while the activation of
N-nitrosodimethylamine was not elevated significantly by the co-
administration. To understand the mechanism for the additive effects,
induction of specific isozymes of cytochrome P450 involved in the activation
of the mutagens was studied. Co-administration of BHT (0.1%) and flavone
(0.1%) increased markedly the levels of proteins and the activities of the
enzymes related to the isozymes of CYP2A and CYP2B, while co-administration of
BHA (0.2%) and flavanone (0.1%) elevated those related to CYP1A. Further, the
activation of aflatoxin B1 and benzo[a]pyrene in hepatic microsomes was
inhibited by the antibodies against these isozymes, which suggested that the
enhanced activation of the mutagens by the co-administration might be mediated
by the induction of these isozymes.

Biochem Soc Trans 1977;5(5):1489-92. **Frameshift mutagenicity of certain
naturally occurring phenolic compounds in the 'Salmonella/microsome' test:
activation of anthraquinone and flavonol glycosides by gut bacterial
enzymes.** Brown JP, Dietrich PS, Brown RJ

Mutagenesis 1997 Sep;12(5):383-90 **Involvement of rat cytochrome 1A1 in the
biotransformation of kaempferol to quercetin: relevance to the genotoxicity of
kaempferol.**  Silva ID, Rodrigues AS, Gaspar J, Maia R, Laires A, Rueff J.
Kaempferol is a flavonoid widely distributed in edible plants and has been
shown to be genotoxic to V79 cells in the absence of external metabolizing
systems. The presence of an external metabolizing system, such as rat liver
homogenates (S9 mix), leads to an increase in its genotoxicity, which is
attributed to its biotransformation to **the more genotoxic flavonoid
quercetin** , via the cytochrome P450 (CYP) mono-oxygenase system.

Environ Health Perspect 1997 Apr;105 Suppl 3:633-6 **Dietary estrogens
stimulate human breast cells to enter the cell cycle.** Dees C, Foster JS,
Ahamed S, Wimalasena J. **"Our findings are consistent with a conclusion that
dietary estrogens at low concentrations do not act as antiestrogens, but act
like DDT and estradiol to stimulate human breast cancer cells to enter the
cell cycle."**  

© Ray Peat 2008. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

