![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Osteoporosis, harmful calcification, and nerve/muscle malfunctions**  

During pregnancy, a woman's ability to retain dietary calcium and iron
increases, and the baby seems to be susceptible to overloading. A normal baby
doesn't need dietary iron for several months, as it uses the iron stored in
its tissue, and recently it has been reported that normal fetuses and babies
may have calcified pituitary glands. Pituitary cell death is sometimes seen
with the concretions. (Groisman, et al.) Presumably, the calcification is
resorbed as the baby grows. This is reminiscent of the "age pigment" that can
be found in newborns, representing fetal stress from hypoxia, since that too
disappears shortly after birth. Iron overload, age pigment, and calcification
of soft tissues are so commonly associated with old age, that it is important
to recognize that the same cluster occurs at the other extreme of (young) age,
and that respiratory limitations characterize both of these periods of life.  

Calcium is probably the most popular element in physiological research, since
it functions as a regulatory trigger in many cell processes, including cell
stimulation and cell death. Its tendency to be deposited with iron in damaged
tissue has often been mentioned. In hot weather, chickens pant to cool
themselves, and this can lead to the production of thin egg shells. Carbonated
water provides enough carbon dioxide to replace that lost in panting, and
allows normal calcification of the shells. [Science 82, May, 1982] The
deposition of calcium is the last phase of the "tertiary coat" of the egg, to
which the oviduct glands successively add albumin, "egg membrane," and the
shell, containing matrix proteins (including some albumin; Hincke, 1995) and
calcium crystals. Albumin is the best understood of these layers, but it is
still complex and mysterious; its unusual affinity for metal ions has invited
comparisons with proteins of the immune system. It is known to be able to bind
iron strongly, and this is considered to have an "immunological" function,
preventing the invasion of organisms that depend on iron. Maria de Sousa
("Iron and the lymphomyeloid system: A growing knowledge," Iron in Immunity,
Cancer and Inflammation, ed. by M. de Sousa and J. H. Brock, Wiley & Sons,
1989) has argued that the oxygen delivery system and the immune system evolved
together, recycling iron in a tightly controlled system.  

The role of macrophages in the massive turnover of hemoglobin, and as
osteoclasts, gives us a perspective in which iron and calcium are handled in
analogous ways. Mechnikov's view of the immune system, growing from his
observations of the "phagocytes," similarly gave it a central role in the
organism as a form-giving/ nutrition-related process. In a family with
"marble-bone disease," or osteopetrosis, it was found that their red blood
cells lacked one form of the carbonic anhydrase enzyme, and that as a result,
their body fluids retained abnormally high concentrations of carbon dioxide.
Until these people were studied, it had been assumed that an excess of carbon
dioxide would have the opposite effect, dissolving bones and causing
osteoporosis or osteopenia, instead of osteopetrosis. The thyroid hormone is
responsible for the carbon dioxide produced in respiration. Chronic
hypothyroidism causes osteopenia, and in this connection, it is significant
that women (as a result of estrogen's effects on the thyroid) are much more
likely than men to be hypothyroid, and that, relative to men, women in general
are "osteopenic," that is, they have more delicate skeletons than men do.  

In an experiment, rats were given a standard diet, to which had been added 1%
Armour thyroid, that is, they were made extremely hyperthyroid. Since their
diet was inadequate (later experiments showed that this amount of thyroid
didn't cause growth retardation when liver was added to the diet) for their
high metabolic rate, they died prematurely, in an apparently undernourished
state, weighing much less than normal rats. Their bones, however, were larger
and heavier than the bones of normal rats. A few incompetent medical "studies"
have made people fear that "taking thyroid can cause osteoporosis."
Recognizing that hypothyroid women are likely to have small bones and
excessive cortisol production, the inadequate treatment of hypothyroidism with
thyroxin (the thyroid-suppressive precursor material), is likely to be
associated with relative osteoporosis, simply because it doesn't correct
hypothyroidism. Similar misinterpretations have led people to see an
association between "thyroid use" (generally thyroxin) and breast cancer--
hypothyroid women are likely to have cancer, osteoporosis, obesity, etc., and
are also likely to have been inadequately treated for hypothyroidism. T3, the
active form of thyroid hormone, does contribute to bone formation. (For
example, M. Alini, et al.)  

Around the same time (early 1940s) that the effects of thyroid on bone
development were being demonstrated, progesterone was found to prevent age-
related changes in bones, and "excessive" seeming doses of thyroid were found
to prevent age-related joint diseases in rats.  

A logical course of events, building on these and subsequent discoveries,
would have been to observe that the glucocorticoids cause a negative calcium
balance, leading to osteoporosis, and that thyroid and progesterone oppose
those hormones, protecting against osteoporosis. But the drug industry had
discovered the profits in estrogen ("the female hormone") and the cortisone-
class of drugs. Estrogen was promoted to prevent miscarriages, to stop girls
(and boys) from growing too tall, to cure prostate and breast cancer, to
remedy baldness, and 200 other absurdities. As all of those frauds gradually
became untenable, even in the commercial medical culture, the estrogen
industry began to concentrate on osteoporosis and femininity. Heart disease
and Alzheimer's disease back those up.

"If estrogen causes arthritis, prescribe prednisone for the inflammation. If
prednisone causes osteoporosis, increase the dose of estrogen to retard the
bone-loss. People are tough, and physiological therapies aren't very
profitable."  

Fifteen years ago I noted in a newsletter that hip fractures most often occur
in frail, underweight old women, and that heavier, more robust women seem to
be able to bear more weight with less risk of fracture. Although I hadn't read
it at the time, a 1980 article (Weiss, et al.) compared patients with a broken
hip or arm with a control group made up of hospitalized orthopedic patients
with problems other than hip or arm fractures. The fracture cases' weight
averaged 19 pounds lighter than that of the other patients. They were more
than 3.6 times as likely to be alcoholic or epileptic. It would be fair to
describe them as a less robust group.  

Since the use of estrogen has become so common in the U.S., it is reasonable
to ask whether the incidence of hip fractures in women over 70 has declined in
recent decades. If estrogen protects against hip fractures, then we should see
a large decrease in their incidence in the relevant population.  

Hip fractures, like cancer, strokes, and heart disease, are strongly
associated with old age. Because of the baby-boom, 1945 to 1960, our
population has a bulge, a disproportion in people between the ages of 35 and
50, and those older. Increasingly, we will be exposed to publicity about the
declining incidence of disease, fraudulently derived from the actually
declining proportion of old people. For example, analyzing claims based on the
pretense that the population bulge doesn't exist, I have seen great publicity
given to studies that would imply that our life-expectancy is now 100 years,
or more.  

Comparing the number of hip fractures, per 1000 75 year old women, in 1996,
with the rate in 1950, we would have a basis for judging whether estrogen is
having the effect claimed for it.  

The x-ray data seem to convince many people estrogen is improving bone health,
by comparing measurements in the same person before and after treatment. Does
estrogen cause water retention? Yes. Does tissue water content increase
measured bone density? Yes. Are patients informed that their "bone scans"
don't have a scientific basis? No. The calcification of soft tissues under the
influence of estrogen must also be taken into account in interpreting x-ray
evidence. (Hoshino, 1996) Granted that woman who are overweight have fewer hip
fractures (and more cancer and diabetes), what factors are involved? Insulin
is the main factor promoting fat storage, and it is anabolic for bone. (Rude
and Singer, "Hormonal modifiers of mineral metabolism.") The greatest decrease
in bone mass resulting from insulin deficiency was seen in white females, and
after five years of insulin treatment, there was a lower incidence of
decreased bone mass (Rosenbloom, et al., 1977). McNair, et al. (1978 and 1979)
found that the loss of bone mass coincided with the onset of clinical
diabetes. Since excess cortisol can cause both high blood sugar and bone loss,
when diabetes is defined on the basis of high blood sugar, it will often
involve high blood sugar caused by excess cortisol, and there will be calcium
loss. Elsewhere, I have pointed out some of the similarities between menopause
and Cushing's syndrome; a deficiency of thyroid and progesterone can account
for many of these changes. Nencioni and Polvani have observed the onset of
progesterone deficiency coinciding with bone loss, and have emphasized the
importance of progesterone's antagonism to cortisol.  

Johnston (1979) found that progesterone (but not estrone, estradiol,
testosterone, or androstenedione) was significantly lower in those losing bone
mass most rapidly.  

Around the age of 50, when bone loss is increasing, progesterone and thyroid
are likely to be deficient, and cortisol and prolactin are likely to be
increased. Prolactin contributes directly to bone loss, and is likely to be
one of the factors that contributes to decreased progesterone production.  

Estrogen tends to cause increased secretion of prolactin and the
glucocorticoids, which cause bone loss, but it also promotes insulin
secretion, which tends to prevent bone loss. All of these factors are
associated with increased cancer risk.  

Thyroid and progesterone, unlike estrogen, stimulate bone-building, and are
associated with a decreased risk of cancer. It seems sensible to use thyroid
and progesterone for their general anti-degenerative effects, protecting the
bones, joints, brain, immune system, heart, blood vessels, breasts, etc.  

But the issue of calcification/decalcification is so general, we mustn't lose
interest just because the practical problem of osteoporosis is approaching
solution.  

For example, healthy high energy metabolism requires the exclusion of most
calcium from cells, and when calcium enters the stimulated or deenergized
cell, it is likely to trigger a series of reactions that lower energy
production, interfering with oxidative metabolism. During aging, both calcium
and iron tend to accumulate and they both seem to have an affinity for similar
locations, and they both tend to displace copper. (Compare K. Sato, et al., on
the calcification of copper-containing paints.) Elastin is a protein, the
units of which are probably bound together by copper atoms. In old age,
elastin is one of the first substances to calcify, for example in the elastic
layers of arteries, causing them to lose elasticity, and to harden into almost
bone-like tubes. In the heart and kidneys, the mitochondria (rich in copper-
enzymes) are often the location showing the earliest calcification, for
example when magnesium is deficient.  

Obviously, certain proteins have higher than average affinity for copper,
iron, and calcium. For example, egg-white's unusual behavior with copper can
be seen if you make a meringue in a copper pan--the froth is unusually firm.
My guess is that copper atoms bind the protein molecules into relatively
elastic systems. In many systems, calcium forms the link between adhesive
proteins.  

In brain degeneration, the regions that sometimes accumulate aluminum, will
accumulate other metals instead, if they predominate in the environment;
calcium is found in this part of the brain in some of the Pacific regions
studied by Gajdusek. Certain cells in the brain used to be called
"metalophils," because they could be stained intensely with silver and other
metals; I suppose these are part of the immune system, handling iron as
described by Maria de Sousa. Macrophages have been proposed as an important
factor in producing atherosclerotic plaques (Carpenter, et al.). There is
evidence that they (and not smooth muscle cells) are the characteristic foam
cells, and their conversion of polyunsaturated oils into age pigment accounts
for the depletion of those fats in the plaques. The same evidence could be
interpreted as a defensive reaction, binding iron and destroying unsaturated
fatty acids, and by this detoxifying action, possibly protecting against
calcification and destruction of elastin. (This isn't the first suggestion
that atherosclerosis might represent a protective process; see S. M.
Plotnikov, et al., 1994.)  

Since carbon dioxide and bicarbonate are formed in the mitochondria, it is
reasonable to suppose that the steady outward flow of the bicarbonate anion
would facilitate the elimination of calcium from the mitochondria. Since
damaged mitochondria are known to start the process of pathological
calcification in the heart and kidneys, it probably occurs in other tissues
that are respiratorily stressed. And if healthy respiration, producing carbon
dioxide, is needed to keep calcium outside the cell, an efficient defense
system could also facilitate the deposition of calcium in suitable places--
depending on specific protein binding. The over-grown bones in the
hyperthyroid rats and the women with osteopetrosis suggest that an abundance
of carbon dioxide facilitates bone formation. Since no ordinary inorganic
process of precipitation/crystallization has been identified that could
account for this, we should consider the possibility that the protein matrix
is regulated in a way that promotes (or resists) calcification. The affinity
of carbon dioxide for the amine groups on proteins (as in the formation of
carbamino hemoglobin, which changes the shape of the protein) could change the
affinity of collagen or other proteins for calcium. Normally, ATP is
considered to be the most important substance governing such changes of
protein conformation or binding properties, but ordinarily, ATP and CO2 are
closely associated, because both are produced in respiration. Gilbert Ling has
suggested that hormones such as progesterone also act as cardinal adsorbants,
regulating the affinity of proteins for salts and other molecules.  

Cells have many proteins with variable affinity for calcium; for example in
muscle, a system called the endoplasmic reticulum, releases and then
sequesters calcium to control contraction and relaxation. (This calcium-
binding system is backed up by--and is spatially in close association with--
that of the mitochondrion.) Ion-exchange resins can be chemically modified to
change their affinity for specific ions, and molecules capable of reacting
strongly with proteins can change the affinities of the proteins for minerals.
What evidence is there that carbon dioxide could influence calcium binding?
The earliest deposition of crystals on implanted material is calcium
carbonate. (J. Vuola, et al, 1996.) In newly formed bone, the phosphate
content is low, and increases with maturity. While mature bone has an apatite-
like ratio of calcium and phosphate, newly calcified bone is very deficient in
phosphate (according to Dallemagne, the initial calcium to phosphorus ratio is
1.29, and it increases to 2.20.) (G. Bourne, 1972; Dallemagne.)  

The carbonate content of bone is often ignored, but in newly formed bone, it
is probably the pioneer. Normally, "nucleation" of crystals is thought of as a
physical event in a supersaturated solution, but the chemical interaction
between carbon dioxide and amino groups (amino acids, protein, or ammonia, for
example) removes the carbon dioxide from solution, and the carbamino acid
formed becomes a bound anion with which calcium can form a salt. With normal
physiological buffering, the divalent calcium (Ca2+) should form a link
between the monovalent carbamino acid and another anion. Linking with
carbonate (CO32-), one valence would be free to continue the salt-chain. This
sort of chemistry is compatible with the known conditions of bone formation.  

Klein, et al. (1996), think of uncoupled oxidative phosphorylation in terms of
"subtle thermogenesis," which isn't demonstrated in their experiment, but
their experiment actually suggests that stimulated production of carbon
dioxide is the factor that stimulates calcification. Their experiment seems to
be the in vitro equivalent of the various observations mentioned above. DHEA,
which powerfully stimulates bone formation, is (like thyroid and progesterone)
thermogenic, but in these cases, the relevant event is probably the
stimulation of respiration, not the heat production. In pigs (Landrace strain)
susceptible to malignant hyperthermia, there is slow removal of calcium from
the contractile apparatus of their muscles. Recent evidence shows that an
extramitochondrial NADH-oxidase is functioning. This indicates that carbon
dioxide production is limited. I think this is responsible for the cells'
sluggishness in expelling calcium.

Stress-susceptible pigs show abnormalities of muscle metabolism (e.g., high
lactate formation) that are consistent with hypothyroidism. (T. E. Nelson, et
al., "Porcine malignant hyperthermia: Observations on the occurrence of pale,
soft, exudative musculature among susceptible pigs," Am. J. Vet. Res. 35,
347-350, 1974; M. D. Judge, et al., "Adrenal and thyroid function in stress-
susceptible pigs (Sus domesticus)," Am. J. Physiol. 214(1), 146-151, 1968.)  

Malignant hyperthermia during surgery is usually blamed on genetic
susceptibility and sensitivity to anesthetics. (R. D. Wilson, et al.,
"Malignant hyperpyrexia with anesthesia," JAMA 202, 183-186, 1967; B.A Britt
and W. Kalow, "Malignant hyperthermia: aetiology unknown," Canad. Anaesth.
Soc. J. 17, 316-330, 1970.) Hypertonicity of muscles, various degrees of
myopathy and rigidity, and uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation occur in
these people, as in pigs. Lactic acidosis suggests that mitochondrial
respiration is defective in the people, as in the pigs. Besides the
sensitivity to anesthetics, the muscles of these people are abnormally
sensitive to caffeine and elevated extracellular potassium. During surgery,
artificial ventilation, combined with stress, toxic anesthetics, and any
extramitochondrial oxidation that might be occurring (such as NADH-oxidase,
which produces no CO2), make relative hyperventilation a plausible explanation
for the development of hyperthermia. Hyperventilation can cause muscle
contraction. Panting causes a tendency for fingers and toes to cramp. Free
intracellular calcium is the trigger for muscle contraction (and magnesium is
an important factor in relaxation.) Capillary tone, similarly, is increased by
hyperventilation, and relaxed by carbon dioxide. The muscle-relaxing effect of
carbon dioxide shows that the binding of intracellular calcium is promoted by
carbon dioxide, as well as by ATP. The binding of calcium in a way that makes
it unable to interfere with cellular metabolism is, in a sense, a variant of
simple extrusion of calcium, and the binding of calcium to extracellular
materials. A relaxed muscle and a strong bone are characterized by bound
calcium.  

Activation of the sympathetic nervous system promotes hyperventilation. This
means that hypothyroidism, with high adrenalin (resulting from a tendency
toward hypoglycemia because of inefficient use of glucose and oxygen),
predisposes to hyperventilation.  

Muscle stiffness, muscle soreness and weakness, and osteoporosis all seem to
be consequences of inadequate respiration, allowing lactic acid to be produced
instead of carbon dioxide. Insomnia, hyperactivity, anxiety, and many chronic
brain conditions also show evidence of defective respiration, for example,
either slow consumption of glucose or the formation of lactic acid, both of
which are common consequences of low thyroid function. Several studies (e.g.,
Jacono and Robertson, 1987) suggest that abnormal calcium regulation is
involved in epilepsy. The combination of supplements of thyroid (emphasizing
T3), magnesium, progesterone and pregnenolone can usually restore normal
respiration, and it seems clear that this should normalize calcium metabolism,
decreasing the calcification of soft tissues, increasing the calcification of
bones, and improving the efficiency of muscles and nerves. (Magnesium, like
carbonate, is a component of newly formed bone.) The avoidance of
polyunsaturated vegetable oils is important for protecting respiration; some
of the prostaglandins they produce have been implicated in osteoporosis, but
more generally, they antagonize thyroid function and they can interfere with
calcium control. The presence of the "Mead acid" (the omega-9 unsaturated fat
our enzymes synthesize) in cartilage suggests a new line of investigation
regarding the bone-toxicity of the polyunsaturated dietary oils.  

REFERENCES  

G. R. Sauer, et al., "A facilitating role for carbonic anhydrase activity in
matrix vesicle mineralization," Bone and Mineral 26(1), 69-79, 1994. T. R.
Anellet, "Effects of medium acidification by alteration of carbon dioxide or
bicarbonate concentration on the resorptive action of rat osteoclasts," J.
Bone and Mineral Res. 9(3), 375-379, 1994. (...resorption was almost abolished
in the presence of 2.5% CO2 at pH 7.61 but increased in a stepwise manner up
to 1.3 pits per osteoclast when dentin slices were cultured with 10% CO2 at pH
6.97.")

D. A. Bushinsky, et al., "Acidosis and bone," Min. & Electrolyte Metab.
20(1-2), 40-52, 1994. ("During acute respiratory acidosis there is no
measurable influx of protons in bone and during chronic studies there is no
measurable calcium efflux.")

D. A. Bushinsky, et al., "Decreased bone carbonate content in response to
metabolic but not respiratory acidosis," Amer. J. Physiol. 265(4, part 2),
F530-F536, 1993. ("...elevated pCO2 doesn't allow bone carbonate dissolution
despite reduced pH.")

J. Vuola, et al., "Bone marrow induced osteogenesis in hydroxyapatite and
calcium carbonate implants," Biomaterials 17(18), 1761-1766, 1996. A. H.
Knell, I. J. Fairchild, and K. Swett, Palaios 8, 512-525, 1993. (Late
proterozoic ocean was supersaturated with calcium carbonate.) F. Marin, et
al., "Sudden appearance of calcified skeletons at precambrian-cambrian
transition," Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S. 93(4), 1554-1559, 1996.

M. J. Dallemagne, Acta Physiother. Rheumatol. Belg.3, 77, 1947; Nature
(London) 161, 115, 1948; Annu. Rev. Physiol. 12, 101, 1950; J. Physiol.
(Paris) 43, 425, 1951.

G. H. Bourne, ed., The Biochemistry and Physiology of Bone; Physiology and
Pathology, Academic Press, 1972.

J. A. Schlechte, et al., "Bone density in amenorrheic women with and without
hyperprolactinemia," J. Clin. Endocrinol. & Metabolism 56, 1120, 1983.
(Evidence for a direct effect of prolactin on bone.) P. S. Dannies, "Control
of prolactin production by estrogen," chapter 9, p. 289, in Biochemical
Actions of Hormones XII, Academic Press, 1985. J.-J. Body, et al., "Calcitonin
deficiency in primary hypothyroidism," J. Clin. Endocrinology and Metabolism
62(4), 700, 1986. ("We conclude that the process that causes hypothyroidism in
patients with autoimmune thyroid disease can also cause marked CT
deficiency.") T. Nencioni and F. Polvani, "Rationale for the use of calcitonin
in the prevention of post-menopausal osteoporosis," in Calcitonin, A. Pecile,
editor, Elsevier Science Publ., 1985.

C. C. Johnston, et al., "Age-related bone loss," pages 91-100 in U. S. Barrel,
editor, Osteoporosis II, Grune and Stratton, N. Y., 1979. E. I. Barengolts, et
al., "Progesterone antagonist RU 486 has bone-sparing effects in
ovariectomized rats," Bone 17(1), 21-25, 1995. "...progesterone prevents
ovariectomy-induced bone loss." M. Kasra and M. D. Grynpas, "The effects of
androgens on the mechanical properties of primnate bone," Bone 17(3), 265-270,
1995\. D. J. Rickard, et al., "Importance of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-3 and the
nonadherent cells of marrow for osteoblast differentiation from rat marrow
stromal cells," Bone 16(6), 671-678, 1995. ("...growth could be stimulated
by...1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-3, but not dexamethasone, 17 beta-estradiol, or
retinoic acid...." D-3 and glucocorticoids "may regulate osteogenesis from the
bone marrow but a similar role for estrogen is not supported.") P. W.
Stacpoole, "Lactic acidosis and other mitochondrial disorders," Metabolism
46(3), 306-321, 1997.

L. M. Banks, et al., "Effect of degenerative spinal and aortic calcification
on bone density measurements in post-menopausal women: Links betwwen
osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease?" Eur. J. of Clin. Investigation
24(12), 813-817, 1994. ("Women with spinal degenerative calcification had
higher spine bone density when measured by dual photon absorptionmetry
compared to those without calcification." "Women with aortic calcification had
significantly lower quantitative computer tomography and proximal femur bone
density compared to those without calcification."

S. E. Wendelaar Bonga and G. Flik, "Prolactin and calcium metabolism in a
teleost fish, Sarotherodon mossambicus," Gen. Compar. Endocrinol. 46, 21-26,
1982.

U.S. Barzel, "The skeleton as an ion exchange system: Implications for the
role of acid-base imbalance in the genesis of osteoporosis," J. of Bone and
Mineral Res. 10(10), 1431-1436, 1995.

P. Schneider and C. Reiners, Letter, JAMA 277(1), 23, Jan. 1, 1997. Dual-
energy x-ray absorptiometry for bone density can lead to false conclusions
about bone mineral content, because of alterations in tissue fat or water
content. "The influence of fat distribution on bone mass measurements with
DEXA can be of considerable magnitude and ranges up to 10% error per 2 cm of
fat."

J. Pearson, et al, Osteoporosis 5, 174-184, 1995 J. Dequeker, et al, "Dual
X-ray absorptiometry--cross-calibration and normative reference ranges for the
spine," Bone 17(3), 247-254, 1995 ("...there is no uniformity in reporting
results and in presenting reference data." "It is...crucially important to
select appropriate reference data in clinical and epidemiological studies.")
T.M. Hangartner and C. C. Johnston, "Influence of fat on bone measurements
with dual-energy absorptionmetry," Bone Miner 9, 71-81, 1990. R. Valkema, et
al., "Limited precision of lumbar spine dual photon absorptiometry by
variations in the soft-tissue background," J. Nucl. Med. 31, 1774-1781, 1990.

M. Silberberg and R. Silberberg, Arch. Path. 31(1), 85-92, 1941. (Progesterone
counteracts aging of bone in guinea pig.) M. Silberberg and R. Silberberg,
Growth 4(3), 1305-14, 1940\. (Decreased severity and incidence of old-age
changes in the joints of normal mice.) G. Coryn, "Recherche experimentale sur
l'influence des glands endocrines sur l'histologie du cartilage de
conjugaison," Annales d'anatomie pathol. 16, 27, 1939.

O. Rahn, "Protozoa need carbon dioxide for growth," Growth 5, 197-199, 1941.
"On page 113 of this volume, the statement of Valley and Rettger that all
bacteria need carbon dioxide for growth had been shown to apply to young as
well as old cells." "...it is possible...to remove it as rapidly as it is
produced, and under these circumstances, bacteria cannot multiply." K. L. H.
Carpenter, et al., "Production of ceroid and oxidised lipids by macrophages in
vitro," Lipofuscin--1987: State of the Art, I. Zs.-Nagy, editor, pp. 245-268,
1988.

A. Schlemmer, et al., "Posture, age, menopause, and osteopenia do not
influence the circadian variation in the urinary excretion of pyridinium
crosslinks," J. Bone Miner. Res. 9(12), 1883-1888, 1994. N. S. Weiss, et al.,
"Decreased risk of fractures of the hip and lower forearm with postmenopausal
use of estrogen,:" N. Engl. J. Med. 303, 1195-1198, 1980.

S. M. Plotnikov, et al., "Anxiety, atherogenesis, and antioxidant protection:
Clinico-pathogenetic relationships," Bull. Exp. Biol. & Medicine 117(2), 221,
1994.

G. M. Groisman, et al., "Calcified concretions in the anterior pituitary gland
of the fetus and the newborn: A light and electron microscopic study," Human
Pathology 27(11), 1139-1143, 1996. (...calcified concretions represent a
normal finding in the anterior pituitary gland of fetuses and young infants.")

K. S. G. Jie. "Vitamin K status and bone mass in women with and without aortic
atherosclerosis: A population-based study," Calc. Tiss. Intern. 59(5),
352-356, 1996\. ("The finding that in atherosclerotic women vitamin K status
is associated with bone mass supports our hypothesis that vitamin K status
affects the mineralization processes in both bone and in atherosclerotic
plaques."

B. Y. Klein, et al., "Cell-mediated mineralization in culture at low
temperature associated with subtle thermogenic response," J. of Cellular
Biochemistry 63(2), 229-238, 1996\. "...cell-mediated mineralization is
preceded by characteristics of anaerobic and low efficiency energy
metabolism." "Modulation of mitochondrial membrane potential and energy
metabolism could be linked to regulation of mineralization by the uncoupling
of oxidative phosphorylation. This uncoupling should be associated with
thermogenesis in cells that induce mineralization." C. R. Heath, B.S.C.
Leadbeater, and M. E. Callow, "The control of calcification of antifouling
paints in hard waters using a phosphonate inhibitor," Biofouling 9(4),
317-325, 1996. ("All paints contained cuprous oxide....)

C. D. Yee, et al., "The relationship of nutritional copper to the development
of postmenopausal osteoporosis in rats," Biol. Trace Element Res. 48(1), 1-11,
1995.

H Hoshino, et al., "The influence of aortic calcification on spinal bone
mineral density in vitro," Calc. Tiss. Intern 59(1), 21-23, 1996. ("...changes
over time in a patient could falsely elevate values.") E. Toussirot, et ,
"Giant calcification in soft tissue after shoulder corticosteroid injection,
J. of Rheumatology 23(1), 181-182, 1996, "Such periarticular calcifications
are rarely observed and generally after triamcinolone hexacetonide injection."

M. Alini, et al., "In serum-free culture thyroid hormones can induce full
expression of chondrocyte hypertrophy leading to matrix calcification," J. of
Bone and Mineral Res. 11(1), 105-113, 1996. ("...we compared the capacity of
T3 with T4 to stimulate expression of the hypertrophic phenotype and matrix
calcification in three . . . prehypertrophic chondrocyte subpopulations."
"...T3 was at least 50-fold more potent than T4. The effects of T3 were most
pronounced with the most immature cells." "...matrix calcification, measured
by the incorporation of Ca45(2+) into the cell layer, always occurred earlier
in cells cultured with T3 compared with T4."

M. T. Hincke, "Ovalbumin is a component of the chicken eggshell matrix,"
Connective Tissue Research 31(3), 227-233, 1995. (Immunochemically
demonstrated in the mammillary bodies of decalcified shell. "These results
indicate that ovalbumin is present during the initial phase of shell formation
and becomes incorporated into the protein matrix of the mammillary bodies.")

A. L. Boskey, et al., "Persistence of complexed acidic phospholipids in
rapidly mineralizing tissues is due to affinity for mineral and resistance to
hydrolytic attack: In vitro data," Calc. Tiss. Intern. 58(1), 45-51, 1996.
(Complexed acidic phospholipids may persist in the growth plate and facilitate
initial mineral deposition.)

A.L. Boskey, et al., "Viable cells are a requirement for in vitro cartilage
calcification," Calc. Tiss. Intern. 58(3), 177-185, 1996. (Challenges dogma
that chondrocyte death must precede calcification in the growth plate.) K.
Sekino, et , role of coccoliths in the utilization of inorganic carbon by a
marine unicellular coccolithophorid, Plant and Cell Physiol 37(2), 123-127,
1996.

Y. Seyama, et al., "Effect of vitamin K2 on experimental calcinosis induced by
vitamin D2 in rat soft tissue," Intern. J. for Vitamin and Nutr. Res. 66(1),
36-38, 1996.

R. Danielsen, et, "Predominance of aortic calcification as an atherosclerotic
manifestation in women: The Reykjavik study," J. of Clin. Epidemiology 49(3),
383-387, 1996\. (...a potential relation to pulse pressure; associated with
blood sugar, use of antidiabetic drugs, serum cholesterol, smoking; much more
frequent in women.) F. Etcharry, et al., Fahr's disease and mitochondrial
myopathy," Revue Neurologique 151(12), 731-733, 1995. (Calcification of the
basal ganglia, Fahr's disease, associated with mitochondrial myopathy.) J. J.
Jacono and J. M. Robertson, "The effects of estrogen, progesterone, and
ionized calcium on seizures during the menstrual cycle of epileptic women,"
Epilepsia 28(5), 571-577, 1987.

J. E. Sojka and C. M. Weaver, "Magnesium supplementation and osteoporosis,"
Nutrition Reviews 53(3), 71-74, 1995. ("...magnesium therapy appears to have
prevented fractures and resulted in a significant increase in bone density.")

R. Eastell, "Management of corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis," J. Internal
Medicine 237(5), 439-447, 1995. "Corticosteroid therapy results in
osteoporosis." "The most important mechanism for the bone loss is a decrease
in osteoblastic activity."

J. P. Bonjour and R. Rizzoli, "Inadequate protein intake and osteoporosis:
Possible involvement of the IGF system,:" Nutritional Aspects of Osteoporosis
'84, Challenges of Mod. Med. 7, 399-406, 1995. H. Pedersen, et al, "Skin
thickness in patients with osteoporosis..." Skin Pharmacology 8(4), 207-210,
1995.

K. E. Schaefer, et al., "Phasic changes in bone CO2 fractions, calcium, and
phosphorus during chronic hypercapnia," J. Applied Physiol. 48(5), 802-811,
1980.

F. C. Driessens, "Probable phase composition of the mineral in bone," Z.
Naturforsch (C) 35(5-6), 357-362, 1980.

G. R. Sauer, et al., "A facilitative role for carbonic anhydrase activity in
matrix vesicle mineralization," Bone Miner. 26(1), 69-71, 1994, E. Reichart,
et al., "CO2 storage in various organs during chronic experimental
hypercapnia," Bull. Eur. Physiopathol. Respir. 12(1), 19-32, 1976. ("During a
four week hypercapnia, this CO2 increase is very inmportant in bone and brain
compared with that of other organs.... ...the bone CO2 content is still
increasing after four weeks.") H. Nitta, et al., "Effects of hot environments
and carbonated drinking water on bone characteristics of eight-week-old
broiler chicks," Poult. Sci. 65(3), 469-473, 1986.

W. G. Bottje and P. C. Harrison, "Effect of carbonated water on growth
performance of cockerels subjected to constant and cyclic heat stress
termperatures," Poult. Sci. 64(7), 1285-92, 1985. P. Quint, et al.,
"Characteristic molar ratios of magnesium, carbon dioxide, calcium and
phosphorus in the mineralizing fracture callus and predentine," Calcif. Tissue
Int.32(3), 257-261, 1980\. ("It was found that the Mg and CO2-contents are
high in relation to Ca and P values during the prestages and early stages of
mineralization.") M. F. Gulyi, "Role of carbonic acid and ammonium nitrogen in
regulation of metabolism and physiological function in heterotrophic
organisms," Ukr. Biokhim. Zh. 52(2), 141-145, 1980.

K. E. Schaefer, et al., "Effect of intermittent exposure to 3% CO2 on
respiration, acid-base balance, and calcium-phosphorus metabolism," Undersea
Biomed. Res. 6 Suppl, S115-34, 1979. ("The known renal response to
hypercapnia, consisting of an increased excretion of titratable acidity,
ammonia, and hydrogen ion excretion, occurred but was interrupted after the
first day....")

U. F. Rasmussen, et al., "Characterization of mitochondria from pig muscle:

Higher activity of exo-NADH-oxidase in animals suffering from malignant
hyperthermia," Biochem. J. 315(Pt. 2), 659-663, 1996. R. K. Rude and F. R.
Singer, "Hormone modifiers of mineral metabolism," in Disorders of Mineral
Metabolism, vol. II: Calcium Physiology, Ed. by F. Bronner and J. W. Coburn,
Academic Press, 1982.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

