![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Pathological Science & General Electric:  
Threatening the paradigm

**Everything in biology depends on the internal order of cells, and on the
interactions of each cell with its surroundings. All of these orderly
interactions involve contacts between biological molecules and water. The
forces regulating interactions on that scale must be understood before life
can be understood, but the nature of the forces at these interfaces has been
controversial for 100 years.  
In 1953, physicist Irving Langmuir gave a talk at the General Electric
laboratory about what he called "pathological science." That talk is still
resonating in the scientific culture, and it is used to reinforce attitudes
similar to those held by Langmuir, i.e., the dominant scientific paradigm of
the 20th century, and to justify certain institutions that regulate
innovation.  
For Langmuir, there was a clearly defined "scientific method," and he said
some people were led away from the proper method by wishful thinking to
interpret ambiguous results as confirmations of their hypothesis. He listed 6
symptoms of pathological science: 1) An effect produced by a barely detectable
cause, and 2) the effect is barely detectable, or many measurements are needed
because of the very low statistical significance of the results, 3) claims of
great accuracy, 4) they involve fantastic theories contrary to experience, 5)
criticisms are met by _ad hoc_ excuses, and 6) the ratio of supporters to
critics approaches 50%, then fades toward zero. He failed to mention these
features in any research that supported his view of things, and called an idea
pathological when people continued to work on it despite disapproval by the
recognized experts. He didn't mention the Nobel prizes that were given for the
worm theory of cancer or for treating psychological problems with lobotomies,
and he didn't mention that there were organized campaigns against the
publication of disapproved ideas.  
The dominant view in biology, which is analogous to Langmuir's view in
physics, is that all decisive cellular processes involve the direct mechanical
contact of one molecule with another, the activation of a lock (an enzyme or
receptor) by a key that has the right shape, or the adhesion of a molecule to
another substance according to its chemical composition. An alternative view,
now clearly supported by the evidence, is that there are forces that aren't
merely between molecular surfaces, but rather that the local conditions at the
surfaces of proteins and other molecules, and the properties of the solvent
water, are modified by the surrounding conditions. It is this alternative view
that is now making progress in understanding disease and health, regeneration
and degeneration. But to judge the new work, it's important to know the nature
of the opposition.  
Thomas Edison, who was adept at publicizing himself as the inventor of ideas
he had bought or stolen, founded General Electric. Attempting to eliminate
Nikola Tesla's system of alternating current, since Edison was invested in
direct current systems, Edison's GE tried to convince the public that direct
current was safer, by using alternating current to electrocute an elephant,
and by promoting its use in the electric chair. GE eventually gave up the
direct current technology for electrifying cities, and they refined the
electric light bulb and were fairly successful in controlling, practically
monopolizing, that market, and in shortening the life of incandescent bulbs.
Carbon filament bulbs made around 1900 often lasted decades; I had one that
kept working until it was broken during a move in 1960. Light bulbs made in
England 65 years ago, and in the Soviet Union, and bulbs currently made in
China, had a life expectancy five times as long as the bulbs made in the US
since GE learned how to carefully control the rate at which the tungsten
filament deteriorates.  
Irving Langmuir was their leading light bulb scientist. In his 1932 Nobel
lecture, he tediously argued that molecules of gas can form only one layer on
a surface such as a filament. About 17 years earlier, Michael Polanyi had
demonstrated that molecules can be adsorbed in multilayers, but his evidence
was dismissed because, according to the understanding of industrial experts
such as Langmuir, and the leading scientific authorities, Einstein, Nernst,
and Haber, it was impossible. They were committed to an explanatory system
that didn't allow events such as those Polanyi described.  
Although Polanyi knew that his adsorption isotherm was more realistic than
Langmuir's (he had demonstrated many cases that Langmuir's didn't describe
correctly), and also easier to understand, he taught Langmuir's isotherm to
his students, because he knew that they would be required to know it to pass
their examinations. He knew he had risked his career by his earlier exposition
of his ideas, and he was unwilling to endanger his students' careers by
involving them in the controversy.  
From 1920 to 1926, before the advent in 1927 of "quantum physics" (with its
still-argued features of delocalized electrons, molecular orbitals, resonance,
non-locality, incommensurability, indeterminism), Polanyi had turned his
attention from the physics of adsorption to chemical structure, and his group
was the first to show that cellulose was made up of long molecules, polymers,
rather than of just associated clusters. That idea didn't catch on, so he
turned to the behavior of crystals and metals. He found that crystals were
much weaker than they should be, according to the strength of the bonds
between their atoms, and showed that this was because of defects, and that
during repeated stresses, they became weaker, as energy migrated through
relatively long distances in the substance, to concentrate the defects. The
idea of lattice defects was acceptable at that time, but long-range mobility
of bond energy was no more acceptable then than it had been when J.C. Bose
described metal fatigue, decades earlier.  
Polanyi also showed that the strength and rigidity of a crystal were altered
when the crystal was immersed in water. Again, such an influence of a surface
on the over-all physical properties of a solid substance had no noticeable
effect on the scientific culture, although his results were published in the
major journals. To adjust one's interpretive system at that time to
rationalize Polanyi's results would have required discarding the basic
assumptions that were behind Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric
effect, and maybe even his theory of Brownian motion. However, by 2011, fewer
people have invested their personal development in those ideas of short-range
electrical binding forces that prevailed early in the 20th century, and now,
for example, the evidence of "delocalized holes in DNA" can be discussed more
openly. Eventually, science textbooks may be rewritten to show a steady
progression of understanding from Bose, though Polanyi, Perutz, Szent-Gyorgyi,
Ling, and Damadian (inventor of the MRI, holder of the patents infringed by
GE, non-winner of the Nobel prize).  
In 1933 J.D. Bernal had proposed a structural model of water that contained a
considerable amount of order (Bernal and Fowler, 1933) but by the 1950s the
idea of spontaneous ordering in water was out of style, and he worked out a
more random structure. Max Perutz, continuing the study of hemoglobin he had
begun with Bernal, became concerned with long range forces acting through
water: "The nature of the forces which keep particles parallel and equidistant
across such great thicknesses of water is not yet clear." Normal wet crystals
of methemoglobin contain regular layers of water 15 Angstroms thick. He
suggested that a laminated structure of the water could plausibly explain his
measurements. Comparing the protein crystal to montmorillonite particles,
which incorporate several layers of water, each 3 Angstroms thick, each layer
of water in the protein crystal would be 4 Angstroms thick, since swelling
proceeds in discrete steps of that thickness. 52.4% of the volume of Perutz's
normal, stable, wet protein crystals consisted of liquid. Part of the water is
a fixed monolayer, but the rest is apparently in the form of mobile,
interactive, multilayers. By 1952, Perutz had decided that long range forces
weren't involved in hemoglobin crystallization, but he didn't comment on the
long range ordering of clays, tobacco mosaic viruses, and other particles and
gels. In 2005, an interlaminar distance of 17.9 Angstroms, or six layers of
water, still seems to be stable in hydrated montmorillonite (Odriozola &
Aguilar, 2005). Clay continues to be studied in relation to nuclear waste
disposal, so the effects of surfaces on water's properties haven't been
entirely excluded from science. The interfacial water in clay has special
catalytic properties that make it interesting to many researchers (Anderson,
1970)  
Bernal's and Perutz' conformity in the 1950s rejection of long range forces
and an ordered structure of water represented the dominant ideas in physics
and physical chemistry, but many people (with very little financial or
institutional support) were continuing to study the structure of water, both
in the bulk phase and near surfaces, as in cells. Philippa Wiggins, Albert
Szent-Gyorgyi, Carlton Hazlewood, Freeman Cope, and Ray Damadian were among
the most active proponents of the importance of structured water in living
cells. Walter Drost-Hansen showed that water near surfaces (vicinal water) is
several percent less dense, and has a greater heat capacity, than bulk water,
and that bulk water undergoes transitions at certain temperatures that alter
its effects on enzyme reactions.  
  
The question regarding the nature of the forces at surfaces or interfaces
affects how we think about everything, from life to nuclear energy. The
political and economic implications of "non-local energy" (which is most
obvious at surfaces) have at times led to organized campaigns to discourage
research in those areas. When Alexandre Rothen found (beginning in 1946) that
enzymes and antibodies had non-local effects, several prestigious publications
claimed to show how he must have been mistaken **:** The **** films **** he
used must have been porous, despite his demonstrations of their continuity.  
The methods he developed at Rockefeller Institute quickly became standard for
accurately measuring very thin films. In the early 1970s, a GE employee, Ivar
Giaever, visited Rothen's lab to learn his methods. Shortly after his visit,
he demonstrated his "new method" to the press. I saw an article about it in
Science News, and wrote them a short letter, pointing out that the method had
been developed and used by Rothen much earlier **;** they printed my note,
which could be seen as a criticism of the author of the news article. About a
week later, I got a letter from Rothen, thanking me for writing to the
magazine; he said they had refused to publish his own letter explaining the
situation, including his interactions with Giaever during the visit. I assume
that the magazine felt some kind of pressure to protect Giaever and GE from an
authoritative accusation of scientific dishonesty.  
In 1968 when I began studying biology at the University of Oregon, the
professor of microscopy, Andrew Bajer, posted a display of dozens of
micrographs, with explanatory captions, along the halls near the entrance of
one of the science buildings. The one that interested me most showed orderly
rows of regularly formed objects on a smooth surface. The caption described it
as clusters of sodium atoms, deposited from vapor, on a film of a polymer
(formvar, I think), under which was a quartz crystal. The caption noted that
the sodium atoms had condensed in a pattern representing the crystal structure
of the underlying quartz. Although Rothen's work involved proteins deposited
from solution, rather than sodium atoms deposited from vapor, Bajer's image
illustrated visually the projection of the forces of crystal structure through
an amorphous film. This seemed to be a graphic representation of Polanyi's
adsorption potential, a force acting on atoms in the space near a surface, as
opposed to Langmuir's local atomic force that didn't reach beyond the first
layer of atoms. The long range order in this case arranged atoms
geometrically, while Rothen's preparations showed a "projected" specificity,
but of a more complex sort.  
Just a few months later, someone who knew of Stephen Carter's demonstration
that fibroblasts will migrate on a glass slide coated with a gold film, toward
areas of greater thickness of the metal, did a similar experiment, but with a
formvar film between the gold and the cells. The cells still migrated up the
gradient, toward the area of thicker gold under the film. The reaction to that
publication was the same as the reaction to Rothen's work 20 years before, the
formvar films contained holes, and the cells were reaching through the film to
touch the metal surface, sort of like kids peeking around a blindfold when
they aren't supposed to be watching. I didn't understand how the holes would
explain anything, even if there were holes and if the cells had put out many
long filopodia to reach through the film, but in fact making a formvar film is
a very standardized technique. They can be made "holey," or like a very open
net, or they can be made solid, just by choosing the concentration of the
polymer used. The difference is very clear, under an electron microscope, but
the professors needed an excuse for dismissing something they didn't want to
understand. Further work was discouraged by their ridicule.  
In Russia, GE had very little influence on the acceptability of ideas in
science, and Boris Deryagin continued (from the 1930s until 1990) to study the
properties of water near surfaces. In 1987 his group demonstrated that cells
can clear particles from a space around themselves, extending more than a
cell's diameter away. This distance is similar to the cell free zone in
flowing blood adjacent to the walls of arterioles, which is probably the
result of multiple interacting forces. At present, processes such as cell
adhesion of leukocytes and stem cells (and tumor cells) to the blood vessel
wall and movement through the blood vessel into the tissues (diapedesis) is
explained in terms of adhesion molecules, disregarding the plausible effects
of long range attractive or repulsive forces. Clumping or sludging of red
blood cells occurs when the organism is failing to adapt to stress, and could
be reasonably explained by a failure of protective repulsive fields. These
fields are developed and maintained by metabolism, primarily oxidative energy
metabolism, and are modified by endogenous regulatory substances and external
conditions, including electromagnetic and electrical fields.  
100 years ago, Albert Einstein was a major influence in popularizing the "only
local" dogma of atomic interactions. (His work led directly to "quantum
physics," but he never accepted its irrational implications. **(1)** I don't
think he ever considered that the assumptions in his [atomic-quantized] theory
of the photoelectric effect were the problem.) One charged atom is completely
neutralized by its association with an oppositely charged atom, and the force
is described by the inverse square law, that the force decreases with the
square of the distance between point charges, meaning that the force is very
strong at very small distances. However, a physical ** _surface_** , a plane
where one substance ends and another begins, follows different rules.  
Different substances have different electron affinities, creating a phase
boundary potential, a charged layer at the interface. (Electrical double
layers at interfaces are important in semiconductors and electrodes, but
biologists have carefully avoided discussing them, except in the very narrow
context of electrodes.) The electrically active surface of a substance, even
though it's made of atoms and electrons, projects its electrical field in
proportion to its area. This principle is as old as Coulomb's law, but the
habit of thinking of electrical charge on the atomic scale seems to make
people forget it. It's exactly the sort of space-filling field that Polanyi's
adsorption isotherm describes. It's also involved in crystal strength and
elasticity as studied by Polanyi, in piezoelectricity, and in generation of
semiconduction in amorphous materials, as used in Stan Ovshinsky's processes.  
Long range structural and electronic interactions produce "antenna" effects,
which are sensitive to very weak fields, whether they originate inside or
outside of the organism. Magnetobiology is often treated as a pseudo-science
or pathological science, because "real science" considers heating and chemical
bond reactions to be the only possible effects of low energy fields or
radiation. Solco Tromp, beginning in the 1930s, showed that cells behave like
liquid crystals, and that liquid crystals can respond to very low electrical
and magnetic fields.  
If the adsorption potential structures the water in its region of space, this
interfacial water is now a new _phase_ , with different physical properties,
including new catalytic properties, such as those recognized by the clay
investigators (which increased its ability to dissolve the clay minerals).  
Several versions of Langmuir's Pathological Science talk have been published,
some of them adding new examples, including "polywater." Langmuir died in
1957, and the first example of polywater was observed by N.N. Fedyakin was
observed in 1961. When finely drawn quartz or Pyrex glass capillary tubes
(with inside diameter of up to a tenth of a millimeter) are suspended in a
container with the air pressure reduced, above a container of distilled water,
so that they are exposed to pure water vapor at room temperature, after a
period of an hour or more (sometimes days or weeks were required) a small drop
of liquid condenses inside some (a small percentage) of the capillary tubes.
Above some of the original drops, a second drop sometimes appeared, that would
enlarge as the first drop shrank. This separation of water into two fractions
was itself anomalous, and the upper drop was found to be denser than normal
water. Many people began studying its properties. Fedyakin found that its
thermal expansion was greater, and its vapor pressure lower, than ordinary
water. Others found that it had a higher refractive index, viscosity, and
surface tension, as well as greater density, than ordinary water.
Birefringence (the splitting of a beam of light into two rays when it passes
through an ordered material) was observed in the anomalous water, and this
usually indicates the presence of a polymer (Fedyakin, et al., 1965; Willis et
al., 1969; Lippincott, et al., 1969) or crystallinity. The water associated
with clay is also birefringent (Derjaguin and Greene-Kelly, 1964), and its
properties are different when the clay absorbs it from the vapor phase or from
liquid water.  
  
Hysteresis is a lag in the behavior of a system, resulting when the internal
state of the system is altered by an action, so that it responds differently
to a repetition of that action; it's the memory of a system that exists only
when the system has internal structure. For example, a gas has relatively
little hysteresis. Perfect elasticity is one extreme of an ordered solid, but
most solids have some hysteresis, in which the deformed material fails to
spring back immediately. Hysteresis of adsorption can be seen at the edges of
a drop of water on a tilted surface, with a steeper contact angle on the newer
contact at the lower edge, showing a reluctance of the water to wet a new
surface, a lower contact angle where the drop is pulling away from the upper
surface, a reluctance to break the contact. The same is seen at the edges of
an evaporating-shrinking drop, or a growing drop. Everyone perceives this
memory function of water.  
Boris Deryagin studied both the elasticity and the hysteresis of water near
surfaces, and both approaches showed that it contained internal structure.
Many dogmatic professors denied that water could show elasticity or "memory,"
because of their interpretive system/mental rigidity.  
When Fedyakin got the help of Deryagin's lab in analyzing the anomalous
material, many different methods of purifying the glass and the water and the
vessel were tried, and its properties were analyzed in many different ways.
When Deryagin first described the material at a conference in Europe, there
was great interest, and eventually hundreds of people began investigating it.  
A British laboratory was the first to get a sample of Deryagin's material in
1966, and their tests confirmed Deryagin's.  
The US Bureau of Standards, having the best analytical instruments in the
world (including a microscope spectrometer), studied it carefully. They
(Lippincott, Stromberg, Grant, & Cessac, 1969) found that its bonds were
stronger than those in ordinary water, and they compared its absorption
spectrum (by computer) with those of 100,000 known substances, and found that
it corresponded with nothing previously known. It didn't have the absorption
band of normal water. When it evaporated, it left no visible residue, and it
turned into ordinary water when heated. They concluded that the physical
structure that would best fit its absorption spectrum was a polymerized form
of water, so they called it "polywater." Later, Lippincott and others (Page,
et al., 1970; Petsko, 1970) did proton magnetic resonance analyses that showed
a difference of polywater from normal water in the hydrogen bonding, a
"deshielding" of the protons, meaning that the electrons were arranged
differently in the molecules.  
In 1969 there were many threats to the dominant paradigm, and many people were
demanding a change in the government's funding priorities. The public
excitement about polywater following the many confirmations of its existence
was disturbing to the defenders of the paradigm. Philip Abelson, the chief
editor of Science magazine, used the magazine to further his political
beliefs.  
Denis Rousseau, a young researcher at Bell Labs (who now writes about
pathological science), published a series of articles in Science describing
his tests of polywater. He played tennis until his tee-shirt was soaked with
sweat, then extracted and concentrated the sweat into a small gummy pellet. He
reported that the infrared spectrum of the sweat concentrate (largely sodium
lactate) was very similar to that of polywater. One of the techniques he used
to identify impurities (electron spectroscopy) requires a high vacuum, so
there couldn't be any normal water present. The water associated with ionic
impurities is driven off at low temperatures compared to the temperature
needed to decompose the anomalous water.  
Although Rousseau's "explanation" was ludicrous, it was just the thing the
professors needed to prevent further challenges to their paradigm. Although
Deryagin published more evidence of the purity of the anomalous water in 1972,
by 1973 the mass media, including Science magazine, were saying that polywater
didn't exist, and that Deryagin had admitted that he was mistaken. But
polywater was Lippincott's term, and what Deryagin said was that silica was
the only impurity that could be identified in the anomalous material.  
There are many antecedents to anomalous water in the literature. In the 1920s,
W.A. Patrick of Johns Hopkins and J. L. Shereshefsky at Howard university
investigated the properties of water in fine capillary tubes and found that
the vapor pressure wasn't the same as that of normal water. (This is what
would have been expected, if Polanyi's adsorption isotherm had been accepted.)
The density of water in clay has been found to be slightly less than normal.
This water bound to clay requires a high temperature to eliminate, similar to
the decomposition temperature of polywater. The catalytic properties of
interfacial water in clay are recognized, causing it to solublize components
of the clay. So it's hard to imagine that there wouldn't be some silica in the
material formed in quartz or glass capillary tubes.  
 **The only thing pathological about the polywater episode was the extreme
effort that was made to stigmatize a whole category of research, to restore
faith in the old doctrine that insisted there are no long range ordering
processes anywhere in the universe.** The successful campaign against
polywater strengthened the mainstream denial of the evidence of ordering in
interfacial and intracellular water, kept the doctrine of the lipid bilayer
cell membrane alive, and up until the present has prevented the proper use of
MRI scans in medical diagnosis.  
  
In 1946, while the government was studying the way nuclear fallout was
influenced by the weather, a group at GE, led by Langmuir, began experimenting
with weather control by means of "cloud seeding." Langmuir observed that the
energy in a cloud system was greater than that in an atomic bomb, and that by
seeding clouds in Europe, disastrous weather effects could be created in the
Soviet Union. The GE group convinced the Pentagon to become involved in
weather control. (The physicist Ross Gunn was transferred directly from work
on the atomic bomb to direct the cloud seeding project.) In one of Langmuir's
seeding experiments, he claimed that he had changed the direction of a
hurricane moving toward the U.S. When a young researcher pointed out that the
weather service had predicted exactly that change of direction, based on the
temperatures of ocean currents, Langmuir became angry, and told the man that
he wasn't going to explain it to him, because he was too stupid to understand.  
Langmuir's attitude toward science was exactly what GE wanted; his career and
reputation were part of the corporation's public relations and business plan.
Science was whatever GE thought was good for their business. That science was
pathological, sometimes by Langmuir's own defining features, most of the time
by the effects it has had on society. The Manhattan Project was central to
GE's business plan, and when the bomb project was completed GE and the Atomic
Energy Commission found that the same subsidies could be used to develop
nuclear generators of electricity. Following Edison's pioneering work with
x-rays, x-ray imaging machines had become very profitable for GE. It was
important to assure the public that medical, industrial, and military
radiation was well understood, well controlled, safe, and essential for the
general welfare. In their view, if every woman could have access to GE's x-ray
mammograms, for example, almost all breast cancers could be cured. The
radiation exposure from living near a GE nuclear power generator is
infinitesimal compared to living in Denver or flying in an airplane. (There is
some discussion of these issues in my January, 2011 newsletter, "Radiation and
growth.") Public relations involves everything from "basic research" to
television advertising.  
If nuclear energy is as safe as the industry and governments say it is, the
reactors should be located in the centers of large cities, because
transmitting electric power long distances is presently wasting 50% of the
power (Hirose Takashi, The Nuclear Disaster that could destroy Japan...and the
world, 2011). Admiral Rickover, influential advocate of nuclear power, said
"...every time you produce radiation, [a] horrible force [is unleashed,] and I
think there the human race is going to wreck itself. [We must] outlaw nuclear
reactors" (January, 1982 congressional testimony) Helen Caldicott says
Fukushima is many times worse than Chernobyl. The radioactive cesium in German
mushrooms and truffles hasn't decreased 25 years after Chernobyl, and the
German government is spending increasing amounts to compensate hunters for the
wild boars (who eat truffles) that must be disposed of as radioactive waste.
**(2)  
** General Electric sent its condolences to the people of Japan, and said the
reactors of that design had functioned well for 40 years; they didn't mention
that Unit I at Fukushima had been scheduled to be shut down on March 26, 2011,
the end of its 40 year life expectancy. In late March, as the accident
continued, Tepco applied for a permit to build two new reactors at the
Fukushima site. In the US, the government continues its loan guarantee policy
to subsidize new reactor construction.  
After many years of working with his metalized slides, Alexandre Rothen found
that their activity, the strength of their long-range influence, varied with a
24 hour cycle, and that their activity could also be destroyed or restored by
putting them in a magnetic field, parallel or perpendicular to the surface.
Around the same time, a Russian biochemist, Simon Shnoll, noticed that there
were cyclic changes in well defined enzymic reactions. Like Rothen, Shnoll did
experiments that showed that the earth's motion (relative to the stars)
affected measurements in the laboratory, even measurements of alpha particles
produced by nuclear fission. Organized matter, whether it's cellular or in the
crystalline solid state, is susceptible to surrounding conditions.  
In 1971 or '72 I learned of H.C. Dudley's idea of a "neutrino sea," that he
suggested might be equivalent to the "luminiferous ether" that had previously
been used to explain light and electromagnetism. I wrote to him, asking if he
thought neutrinos could be involved in biological ordering processes by
resonating with matter under some circumstances. He had been developing a
theory, in which atomic nuclei might interact with a neutrino "ether," in ways
that could affect the decay rate of the unstable isotopes, and so it didn't
seem unreasonable to him that biological structures might also interact with
neutrinos. In October, 1972, he published a purely theoretical article in
which he explained that nuclear reactors might under some conditions become
dangerously unstable. I had earlier seen a newspaper article about an
experiment by a physicist, J.L. Anderson, in which radioactive carbon-14
didn't follow the normal rules of random decay, when the isotope was
incorporated into an oil, which was spread in a monolayer on a metal surface.
By chance, Anderson's experimental article was published simultaneously with
Dudley's theoretical article, though neither one knew of the other's work.  
Nearly all physicists said his results weren't possible, because the small
forces involved in adsorbing an oil to a metal surface were infinitesimal
compared to the force needed to cause nuclear reactions. Over the next few
years, Dudley and others did some experiments that appeared to confirm
Anderson's results, showing that the rate of nuclear reactions can be modified
by mild changes in the physical state of the unstable elements.  
Anderson's and Dudley's work didn't get much attention from the public, so
there was no need for the defenders of the dominant paradigm to attack it.
There was no financial support for continuing their research.  
Behind the industries' assurances that "low level" radiation is safe, whether
it's ionizing radiation, microwave or broadcast frequency electromagnetic
radiation, is their reductionist approach to physics, chemistry, and biology.
Those doctrines no longer have the prestige that they once did, but their
pathological, authoritarian "science" culture is being sustained by the
influence of corporations on mass culture.  
With the institutions of research and education controlled by pharmaceutical,
military and industrial interests for their own benefit, fundamental progress
in knowledge is a threat to the system.  
  
NOTES  
1\. From Einstein's 1926 letter to Max Born: "Quantum mechanics is very worthy
of regard. But an inner voice tells me that this is not yet the right track.
The theory yields much, but it hardly brings us closer to the Old One's
secrets. I, in any case, am convinced the He does not play dice." Quoted in P.
Busch and G. Jaeger, "Unsharp quantum reality," 4 May 2010.  
2\. None of the major institutions in the US are providing basic information
about protection from Fukushima's radioactive fallout. Eating foods produced
before the arrival of the radioactive rain, feeding old foods to chickens and
milk animals, and keeping your metabolic rate high, are the main defenses.
Eventually, fertilizing crops with mined minerals, and enriching the
atmosphere with carbon from coal will dilute the radioactive isotopes from the
nuclear accidents.  
  
REFERENCES  
DM Anderson, **Role of interfacial water and water in thin films in the origin
of life,**[http://history.nasa.gov/CP-2156/ch1.4.htm  
](http://history.nasa.gov/CP-2156/ch1.4.htm)DM Anderson and AR Tice, 1970,
**Low-temperature phases of interfacial water in clay-water systems,** Crrel
Research Reports, Army Dept, US, Res Rpt 290. "The low temperature exotherms
do not depend critically upon water content, but clearly they are related to
clay mineral and exchangeable cation type. The evolution of heat in this
temperature range probably corresponds to a phase change in the interfacial
water.")  
J. Physical Cehmistry 76(4), 1976, **"Non-Poisson distributions observed
during counting of certain carbon-14 labeled (sub) monolayers,"** Anderson JL.  
Biophys. Chem. 113 (2005): 245-253, **Structural and kinetic effects of mobile
phone microwaves on acetylcholinesterase activity,** Barteri M, Pala A,
Rotella S.  
J. Chem. Phys. 1, 515), 1933, Bernal JD & Fowler RH.  
J Cell Biol 1964, 127(1):117-128. **Electric field-directed fibroblast
locomotion involves cell surface molecular reorganization and is calcium
independent,** Brown MJ and Loew LM.  
Nature 1965 208(5016):1183-7, **Principles of cell motility: the direction of
cell movement and cancer invasion,** Carter SB.  
Nature 1967 213: 256-60, **Haptotaxis and mechanism of cell motility,** Carter
SB.  
Popular Science, June 1973, **How you can grow your own polywater,** PA
Christian and LH Berka **:** "Some experts claim this rare substance doesn't
exist. Yet here's how you can harvest enough of it for own experiments." Pyrex
thermometer tubing from a mail-order scientific supply store ....  
Biophysical Journal 9 (1969),303-319, **Nuclear magnetic resonance evidence
using D2O for structured water in muscle and brain,** Cope FW.  
Langmuir 3(5): 607-612 (1987), **Structure of water in thin layers,** Deryagin
BV, Churaev NV.  
Langmuir 3(5): 601-606 (1987), **Modern state of the investigation of long-
range surface forces,** Deryagin BV.  
Trans. Faraday Soc. 60 (1964: 449-455, **Birefringence of thin liquid films,**
Derjaguin BV and Greene-Kelly R.  
Pure & Appl. Chem. 61(11) (1989): 1955-1958, **Influence of surface forces on
the formation of structural peculiarities of the boundary layers of liquids
and boundary phases,** Derjaguin BV. "The surface forces acting beyond the
range of boundary monolayers, are able to change the concentration of
dissolved ions and molecules.  
Trans. Faraday Soc. 60, 449 (1964), **Reversible and irreversible modification
of the properties of liquids under the influence of a lyophilic surface** ,
Derjaguin BV and Green-Kelly R. "Evidence is given of the reversible character
of the modification of the properties of liquids under the action of surface
forces." (Lyophopic substrate, a few molecules thick.) "In other cases, e.g.
water-glass, water-quartz, fatty acids-metals, the substrate alters the
structure of the liquid and the properties depending on it to a depth of many
tens or hundreds of monolayers." (Lyophilic substrate). (the electroviscous
effect, proportional to the square of the zeta-potential).  
Fed Proc Transl Suppl. 1965 24(3):431-3, **Effect of constant magnetic field
on motor activity of birds,** El'darov AL & Kholodov YA.  
Physics A: Statistical and Theoretical Physics 172 (1-2), 161-173. **The
structure and properties of vicinal water: Lessons from statistical
geometry,** Etzler FM, Ross RF, Halcomb RA, (3% greater density, 25% greater
heat capacity.  
Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 165 (1965): 878, Fedyakin N.N.  
FEBS Lett. 367 (1995): 53-55, **Changes in the state of water, induced by
radiofrequency electromagnetic fields,** Fesenko EE and Gluvstein A.Ya.  
D. Green-Kelly, B.V. Derjaguin, **Research in Surface Forces vol. 2,** p. 117,
Consultants Bureau, NY (1966). (Birefringence of water near surfaces, in
layers up to 200 A thick. Also birefringence of the boundary layers of benzene
derivatives.)  
Nature (submitted 1969) Hazlewood CF, Nichols BL, Chamberlain NF.  
Science 164 (1969), p. 1482, Lippincott ER.  
Med. Hypotheses 66 (2006) 518-526, **Cell hydration as the primary factor in
carcinogenesis: A unifying concept,** McIntyre GI.  
Med. Hypothese 69 (2007): 1127-1130, **Increased cell hydration promotes both
tumor growth and metastasis: A biochemical mechanism concsistent with genetic
signatures,** McIntyre, GI.  
J Chem Phys 123, 174708, 2005, **Stability of Ca-montmorillonite hydrates: A
computer simulation study,** Odriozola G & JF Aguilar JF.  
Tranropesactions of the Faraday Society, vol. XLII B, 1946, **"The composition
and swelling properties of haemoglobin crystals,"** Perutz M.  
Science 171(3967), 170-172, **"Polywater" and sweat: Similarities between the
infrared spectra,** D.L. Rousseau,  
Biochim Biophys Acta 1975; 403(1):89-97, **Synchronous reversible alterations
in enzymatic activity (conformational fluctuations) in actomyosin and creatine
kinase preparations,** Shnoll SE, Chetverikova EP.  
Szent-Gyorgyi, A., 1957, **Bioenergetics,** Academic Press, Inc. New York.  
Prog. Polym. Sci. 20 (1995): 1121-1163, **High and low-density water in
gels,** Wiggins PM.  
Nature 222, 159-161, 1969, **"Anomalous" Water** , Willis E, GK Rennia, C
Smart BA Pethica.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2012. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

