![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Physiology texts and the real world**

======================================

Hospital accidents kill more people than highway accidents. But when people
die while they are receiving standard, but irrational and antiscientific
treatments and “support,” the deaths aren’t counted as accidents. The numbers
are large.

Medical training and medical textbooks bear great responsibility for those
unnecessary deaths. Most medical research is done under the influence of
mistaken assumptions, and so fails to correct the myths of medical training.
If the “consumers” or victims of medicine are willing to demand concrete
justifications before accepting “standard procedures,” they will create an
atmosphere in which medical mythology will be a little harder to sustain.

======================================

A sentence taken out of context is likely to be misleading. A chemical
equation that is concerned only with the reactants, catalyst, and product, can
be misleading, and its industrial application is likely to produce devastation
and pollution along with the intended product. In nature and industry, the
reactants, products, and energy changes are linked to the ecology and to the
economy. In physiological chemistry, events in the organism are linked to the
environment so closely that food, water, air, soil, and pollution form a
firmly linked functional system.

But “medical physiology” has evolved as a separate thing, in which formulas
that describe specific situations are linked to each other by fragmentary
schemes, terminology, and computer models. This jerrybuilt scheme is even more
roughly set into a hypothetical environment of “the origin of life,”
“evolution,” “inheritance,” “society,” and a few other perfunctory
contextualizations that have no more relevance to the subject than do the
literary epigraphs that are often used at the beginning of chapters in medical
books, to signify that the author isn’t just a technical hack.

This physiological mythology has made possible a practice of medicine in which
“genes” and “a virus” are regularly invoked to explain things that can’t be
remedied, and in which any fleshy body is described as “well nourished,” and
in which malnutrition and poisoning by pollutants are systematically dismissed
as explanations for sicknesses, while thousands of different drugs are
administered according to instructions given by their salesmen. It is also
deeply linked to attitudes that have turned the practice of medicine into the
surest way for an individual to get rich and retire early. It creates a sense
of confidence that the physician is doing the right thing, because there is a
little physiological rationale for everything. **_When a practice is replaced
by its opposite, there is also a rationale for that._** In fact, medical
textbooks are written to rationalize the highly arbitrary practices of the
industry. If, for some reason, perpetual motion machines had been as
successful economically as steam engines were, laws of thermodynamics would
have been written to describe them, just as thermodynamic laws were invented
to describe the theory of steam engines.

It was odd and interesting when a vice presidential candidate stepped to the
podium several years ago and asked “who am I? What am I doing here?” But those
questions are really of the greatest importance and interest, and physiology
should be an attempt to understand more fully what we are, what we are doing,
and how we are doing it. When we have comprehensive answers to those
questions, then we will be in a position to create systematically valid
solutions for our problems.

For physiology, the equivalent of medicine’s “first do no harm” would be
“first, don’t believe unfounded doctrines.” Accepting that principle puts a
person into a critical attitude, and experiments can become actually
“empirical,” an extension of experience that allows you to perceive new
things, rather than “testing hypotheses.” Unless a hypothesis is a
generalization from real experience, rather than a deduction from a doctrine,
progress is likely to be very slow. A first step in developing a critical
attitude is to identify the idols that stand in the way of real understanding.

**Immunity, intelligence, appetites, tumor growth, aging, the proper
development of organs—everything that we think of as the biological
foundations of health and sickness—will be misinterpreted if there are
fundamental misconceptions about physiology.**

Physiology is the study of the vital functions of organisms, but especially
when talking about “pathologic physiology,” great emphasis in physiology
textbooks is given to the processes that maintain homeostasis of the _milieu
interieur,_ or the constancy of composition of the “fluid in which tissue
cells are bathed.” Since cells are embedded in a gel-like matrix, “connective
tissue,” the connective tissue should have some serious attention in
physiology courses, but in practice its composition is described, and then the
rest of physiology treats it as the “extracellular space.” Only specialists in
the extracellular matrix are likely to take it seriously as a factor in
physiology.

If medical physiologists are likely to think of cells as being “bathed in
fluid” which fills the empty spaces around the cells, they are also likely to
think of the cell’s interior as a watery solution which “fills the space
enclosed by the cell membrane.” It is this image of the organism that has made
traditional biochemistry possible, since enzymes extracted from cells and
dissolved in water had been thought to function the way they function in the
living state. But the living cell isn’t like a tiny water-filled test-tube.

**Some of the points that should be considered in a realistic (and therefore
coherent) physiology text:**

**Connective tissues, ground substance** — making a multicell organism--
secreting the right amount, modifying/maintaining it, responding to the
scaffolding--where the crucial _milieu interieur_ is.

**Cellular energy, a structural idea** —a finely organized catalyst, a
readiness for work, and conditions that determine the equilibrium of
reactions.

**The dimensions of the organism** range from cellular fields to organismic
intentions, via functional systems.

**Physiology should be understood in terms of its geochemical setting,**
because otherwise basic definitions will be built up in the belief that life
is discontinuous from its physical environment, separated by membranes, and
maintained by the expense of energy mainly to preserve gradients across those
membranes **;** while in actuality the chemical energy released by living
substance is spent in renewing structures, and the gradients are mainly
passive physical-chemical consequences of structure. The spontaneous
polymerization that occurs under volcanic conditions creates substances with
intrinsic functions. The living state is a substance that is always being
renewed as it interacts with its environment, and from the larger
persepective, it is an evolving catalyst that modifies the environment so that
the whole system approaches equilibrium with the energy that flows through it.
Since the evolving system stores energy in its structure, the cosmic energy
sources and sinks are at the boundaries of the system, and are the only
questions that (so far) transcend the issue of life in its environment. The
chemistry of the planet is tied up with cosmic energy, but the nature of the
system as a whole is still relatively unexplored. If plants are bracketed by
the sun, carbon dioxide and water, animals are bracketed by sugar and oxygen.

**Acid-base** **regulation** \--selectivity; physical chemistry of coral,
bone; kidney, lung; roles of oxygen, carbon dioxide and protein.

**An Arrhenius base** is something which produces hydroxide ions when it’s
dissolved in water.

**Metal, an element that forms a base** by combining with a hydroxyl group (or
groups).

**Base,** an electropositive element (cation) that combines with an anion to
form a salt; a compound ionizing to yield hydroxyl ion.

**Electropositive** **atoms** tend to lose electrons.

**Electronegative atoms** , such as oxygen, chlorine, and fluorine, tend to
take up an electron and to become negatively ionized.

**Definitions of Arrhenius and Lewis** for acids and bases. It’s important to
keep both sides of an ionizable compound in mind, and to pay more attention to
electrons than to protons.

**A** **Lewis acid** is an electron acceptor.

**Alkali reserve, (Stedman’s phrase:) “the basic ions, mainly the
bicarbonates” (bicarbonates of this or that; there is no abstract
“bicarbonate.”)**

**Carbon dioxide is a neutral Lewis acid, that associates with the hydroxide
ion.** (This observation may be shocking to people who have thought too long
in terms of abstract “bicarbonate.”)

**Carbon dioxide regulates water, minerals, energy and cellular stability,
excitation, and efficiency.**

**Cellular respiration regulates both energy and substance disposition.**

**Respiration regulates osmotic/oncotic pressure, including the hydration (and
dehydration) of the extracellular matrix.**

**Electrons, positive charges, electronegativity, and induction:** The unity
of metabolism and signalling interactions; hormones are physical-chemical
agents, not information carriers. Electrets, piezoelectricity, and
crystal/bond stresses are relevant to physiology; the behavior of ionic
materials in bulk water provides misleading images for physiology. Space
charges are more relevant to physiology than fluxes in ion channels.

**Inductive** effect: an electronic effect transmitted through bonds in an
organic compound due to the electronegativity of substituents.

**Cooperative adsorption** interacts with inductive effects producing
coherent, systemic changes and stabilities.

**Steroids, peptides, biogenic amines, and other things considered as
hormones** and transmitters, are active as modifiers of **_adsorption,
induction, and metabolic pathways._** Their structural effects create, or
inhibit, phase transitions in cells. Synergies of radiation, estrogen, and
hypoxia are intelligible in terms of phase instability.

**Alkaloids:** organic substances occurring naturally, which are basic,
forming salts with acids. The basic group is usually an amino function.

**The disposition of electrons** in cells and tissues is a global phenomenon,
integrating metabolism, pH, osmolarity, and sensitivity. **_Excitation creates
a field of alkalinity._**

**Cellular differentiation; developmental fields, polarities.**

**Regulation of water;** electroosmosis; edema in relation to cellular energy.

**Vicinal water, all water near surfaces, most of the water in cells, has
special properties.**

**Needs on the cellular level guide the organism’s adaptations.**

**Functional systems,** multilevel adaptive integrations, in which many
“systems” and cell types are organized according to activity and needs,
leading to anatomical and functional changes.

**Energy and relaxation, cellular inhibition,** a structural state involving
the entire cell substance. High energy phosphate bonds explain nothing about
the cell’s energy.

**Multilevel self-regulation;** cell intelligence, organic compensations
(function producing structure, organ regeneration, vascular neogenesis, stem
cell functions, immunity/morphogenesis, tubercles/tumors,
fat/fiber/muscle/phagocytosis) permits highly organized and novel adaptive
responses, which are goal-directed rather than mechanistically “programmed”
from the genes.

**Sensitivity and motility** —plants and animals, subtle cues, rhythms,
motivations.

**Adaptation—learning, intention, and stress.**

**Light, energy, motion;** pigments and electron donor-acceptor bonds.

**Acceptor of action, innate and learned models of reality**. Intentionality
is involved in “reflexes.”

**Digestion** —bowel and liver; immune system and nervous system; **need** and
intepretation, analysis; approximation and assimilation. Intestinal flora and
detoxifying. **** Detoxifying fatty acids, estrogen, insulin, nerve chemicals,
etc. ****

**Nutrition—** appetite and satisfaction.

**Reproduction, puberty, menopause;** how they are affected by the
environment.

**Humor, curiosity, exploratory and inventive potentials and need.**

**Growth and aging;** energy, individualization and generalization; mitosis
and meiosis, germ cells.

**Nurse cells,** their interactions in various organs **.**

**Chalones,** wound hormones, phagocytes, regeneration, nerve products;
inhibition of growth by nerves. Frog extracts in development. Anatomy is a
dynamic system, whose integration is part of physiology.

**Inflammations and tumors are systemic events,** in causes and effects.

**Inflammation, edema, fibrosis, calcification, and atrophy--the basic
pathology**.

**_Organisms relate to the biosphere as factors in the creation of new
equilibria._**

Between 1947 and 1956, Arthur C. Guyton, of Ole Miss, wrote a textbook of
medical physiology, and one of his students, J. E. Hall, has added chapters to
it. It is the most widely used physiology textbook in the world. It may be
more influential than the bible, since it has shaped the behavior of millions
of doctors, affecting billions of people. Its success probably has something
to do with Guyton’s unusual personal experience. After graduating from Harvard
Medical School and, along with others from Harvard, working in germ warfare,*
he contracted polio, and returned to Mississippi. As someone moving from the
centers of excellence and power to the most backward state in the nation,
instead of using textbooks he wrote handouts for the classes he taught there,
devising what he thought were plausible explanations for everything in
physiology. A personalized perspective and desire to keep things simple made
the book, based on those handouts, readable and popular.

The circulatory system, and the movement of fluids in the body, are at the
center of physiology, so it is of interest that Guyton believed that, in the
“spaces around cells,” there is a negative pressure, a partial vacuum, that
sucks fluid out of the capillaries. He believed that this suction would
balance a column of 5 or 10 mm of mercury. The rib cage, and the force of the
diaphragm muscle, can maintain a negative pressure around the lungs,
preventing their elastic collapse, but there is no such shell around the rest
of the body; if elastic fibers of connective tissue could be anchored to such
a shell, then such a suction/vacuum would be conceivable.

Hydrostatic and osmotic pressures interact in tissues, but even the
hydrostatic forces produced by the heartbeat are known only approximately, as
estimates, on the microscopic level. The belief in subatmospheric interstitial
pressure is unreasonable on its face, and measurements are so inaccurate in
the microcirculation that its disproof would be somewhat like proving that
fairies aren’t responsible for the Brownian motions seen under a microscope.

The oncotic/osmotic behavior of proteins in the blood and extracellular (the
term **_interstitial_** implies the presence of empty spaces which aren’t
really there) fluid is usually, in medical physiology, assumed to be a fixed
quantity determined by the nature of the polymer. Swelling and syneresis
(contraction) of gels, with the absorption or release of water, are strongly
influenced by the electrical properties of the system, which includes solvent
water, bound water, and small solutes and ions as well as the polymers.
Changes in pH and ionic strength and temperature, and the presence of solutes
modifying the polymer’s affinity for water, affect the osmotic behavior of the
polymer, and of gels formed by such polymers. Since the extracellular spaces
are mainly filled with solid gels, Guyton’s image of simple fluids entering
and leaving these “spaces” reveals a major conceptual error, and that error
has been widely propagated by medical professors. If a person imagines open
spaces, interstices, between cells, then the question of the fluid pressure in
these chambers seems reasonable, and the factors that produce edema will be
thought of mechanically. But if we call the material between cells the
“extracellular matrix,” and recognize its relatively solid gel nature, we will
see the problem of edema in physical-chemical terms, rather than as a problem
of simple hydraulics.

[*Biographical side-lights **:** Guyton graduated from Ole Miss in 1939, got
his medical degree from Harvard in 1943, where the department of bacteriology
had a grant to study the polio virus, and where he worked with people
“involved in the war effort,” and then from 1944 to 1946 was involved in germ
warfare research, mainly at Camp Detrick. Camp Detrick had been established as
the center for chemical and biological warfare research, and a test site was
established in Mississippi in 1943. Guyton’s first paper was on aerosol
research (published in 1946), and studies at that time were being done to
improve the spreading of germs in aerosols. Bacterial aerosols were tested on
the public in San Francisco, in 1950. Guyton’s Harvard colleagues established
a polio research lab at Children’s Hospital Medical Center. When he left the
navy, after working at Camp Detrick, Guyton resumed work at Mass General, and
contracted polio before he finished his residency.]

**Idols of medical physiology, foundations and cornerstones for the landfill,
some things you shouldn’t know about physiology:**

Genes control the cell, the organism is its genome, the nucleus regulates the
cytoplasm. Information flowing from the genes produces and maintains the
organism.

Acquired traits aren’t passed on; mutations are random, the genome doesn’t
acquire information from the organism or environment, the germ-line is
isolated.

Physiology is bounded by the informational function of genes.

The cell is a drop of water containing dissolved chemicals enclosed in a
membrane.

Random diffusion governs energy metabolism, gene induction, and other
intracellular events.

Enzyme reactions occur when dissolved molecules randomly diffusing come into
contact with a suitable enzyme, as described by the Michaelis-Menton equation.

The Donnan equilibrium explains cellular electrical behavior, and since ions
are distributed across the membrane by active transport, the membrane
potential is maintained by the expense of metabolic energy.

Water is just a peculiar solvent.

Water structure changes only at extremes of temperature.

Cells are perfect osmometers.

There are empty spaces between cells.

The membrane regulates the composition of the cytoplasm, with pumps and pores
and channels. Cells must produce enough energy to keep the pumps running.

Membrane receptors regulate cell responses.

Cells are activated by receptors, and physical forces for which there are no
receptors have no effect on cells except when they are above a threshold at
which they cause discrete chemical changes.

The nervous system is hard-wired.

Brain and heart cells don’t regenerate.

There is an immune system, whose function is to destroy pathogens, with
inflammation as one of its functions, and its specific reactions are
determined by the selection of clones which were generated by random
mutations; an autonomic nervous system, which regulates visceral reflexes by
innervating, via receptors, smooth muscle, heart muscle, and glands; an
endocrine system, regulated mainly by negative feedback, that produces hormone
molecules that carry messages to the receptors in certain target tissues.

Inflammation is produced by germs, and is a defensive reaction of the immune
system, and so is good. (Sterile inflammation is too confusing to include
within the ambit of medical physiology, since it is associated with serious
harm to the organism. The roles in inflammation of the nervous and endocrine
systems and kidneys and membrane pumps and osmoregulation aren’t discussed in
polite books.)

During development, cells are organized into systems, and they don’t change
their type. In the case of germ cells, their type is determined before they
exist. Cells are able to undergo only about 50 divisions, and most of those
divisions are used up in producing an adult organism.

The committed nature of the organism’s cells and anatomy make radical
functional adaptation impossible.

Hormones and transmitter substances act only through specific receptor
molecules.

High energy phosphate bonds in compounds such as ATP provide energy to
molecular pumps and motors.

Molecular forces act only locally.

Pathologies are primarily local: Inflammations and tumors have local causes,
and their effects are local. Specific and local treatments are ideal.
Circulation is treated as a plumbing problem, tumors as clones of defective
cells.

Consciousness is produced by nervous signals that transmit information, and
can be compared with the handling of information by computers.

Excitation and inhibition are functions of cell membranes.

Artificial intelligence research into computational and nerve net systems is
as much a part of research into the physiology of consciousness as computer
modeling of feedback systems is a form of research into endocrine physiology
and immunology.

Estrogen, testosterone, thyroid, prolactin, serotonin, adrenalin,
prostaglandins, etc., are carriers of information in an informational system.

Cyclic functions and behaviors are governed by genes.

The existence of hard-wired informational receptor systems and gene-induction
systems is necessary because of the random diffusional nature of the other
cellular processes and materials.

**_Essentially, an organism consists of random inert matter given form and
activity by the imposition of genetic information accumulated through random
mutations._**

(There are really people who still believe those things.)

**_A NOTE ON SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTIONS:_**

If scientific revolutions depended on "the authorities," then the Copernican
revolution would be dated from the Pope's apology. The fact that the major
journals are controlled by antiscientific dimwits helps to define where
science exists. Gilbert Ling's revolution in cell physiology has been moved
along by the existence of the journal, Physiological Chemistry and Physics
(and medical NMR).

Michael Polanyi, in **_Personal Knowledge,_** maybe even more than Thomas Kuhn
did in his famous book ( _Structure of Scientific Revolutions_ ), helped to
solidify the belief that there is a real international monolithic "community
of science." Even though Polanyi, working "in isolation" in Hungary created
his general and elegant adsorption isotherm, he didn't teach it to his own
students, because of his belief in that community of science, which ridiculed
his work because it wasn't based on their (false) assumptions about the
electrical nature of matter.

The linguistic and cultural isolation of Hungary and Russia from Europe has
permitted them to evolve distinctive scientific cultures. C.C. Lindegren, in
Cold War in Biology, showed that political forces in the U.S. and England
suppressed anti-Mendelian ideas by identifying them as subversive, imposing
the Central Dogma of genetics. But even within an authoritarian national
tradition, there are little communities of science, where the real development
of thought can take place.

Perceptions that are clear and useful are the real revolutions in science, and
the rest of it has to do with social and financial commitments.

Even in the short time since Kuhn wrote his book, the status of medicine has
changed significantly, putting it right up with militarism and the energy
industry as a source of political and economic power. The authoritarian
monolith that has been known as the community of science has become
increasingly (even in areas such as astronomy, where commercial interests
aren't so crudely involved) a structure of cultural propaganda maintained by
bullying and fraud. Since the "normal science" in these authoritarian settings
is dedicated to evading the truth, it becomes almost a guide to where to look
for the truth. It's sort of analogous to the "mystery" of why breast cancer
mortality is lowest in the poorest part of the U.S., Appalachia, and highest
in the richest regions: the medical industry goes where the money is, taking
death with it. Science, like health, thrives on the neglect of the corrupt
industry.

I have always felt that the cybernetic definition of communication as the
transfer of something that makes a difference should be applied to speech and
writing. As a student and teacher, I saw that information which made a
difference was the essence of intellectual excitement and growth. But making a
difference is exactly what university administrators and journal editors don't
want.

  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2014. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

