![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
The Progesterone Deceptions**  

In the 1930s, it was demonstrated that estrogen, even in small doses, produced
abortions, and that when it is given early enough, even a very small dose will
prevent implantation of the fertilized embryo. Progesterone was known, by the
early 1940s, to protect against the many toxic effects of estrogen, including
abortion, but it was also known as nature's contraceptive, since it can
prevent pregnancy without harmful side-effects, by different mechanisms,
including prevention of sperm entry into the uterus. That is, progesterone
prevents the miscarriages which result from excess estrogen (1,2), but if used
before intercourse, it prevents conception, and thus is a true contraceptive,
while estrogen is an abortifacient, not a contraceptive.  

In the 1950s, there was a search for chemicals which would prevent ovulation.
According to Carl Djerassi (), drug companies were extremely reluctant to risk
a religious backlash against their other products, and so hesitated to market
contraceptives. Obviously, the induction of monthly abortions would have been
even harder to sell.  

According to Djerassi (3), Until the middle 1940s ti was assumed that
progesterone's biological activity was extremely specific and that almost any
alteration of the molecule would diminish or abolish its activity. This would
obviously discourage interest from the drug companies, who could patent a
substance which they had chemically modified, but could not patent a simple
natural substance. However, many substances--even non-steroidal chemicals--
were known to have estrogenic action. (4)  

By 1942, Hans Selye had demonstrated that natural steroids retain their
activity when administered orally. But every drug company with a steroid
patent had an obvious interest in having the public believe that there is a
reason that the natural steroids cannot be conveniently used. The doctrine
that natural steroids are destroyed by stomach acid appeared, was promoted,
and was accepted--without any supporting evidence. In the manufacture of
progesterone, the precursor steroid is boiled in hydrochloric acid to free it
from its glucose residue. No one seriously believed that stomach acid hurts
progesterone, except the public--and the doctors, who had seen the claim in
their medical journals, and had heard it from drug salesmen.  

The myth stopped the use of the cheap tablets of progesterone, as tablets of
the synthetic progestins came on the market, at a much higher price. Doctors
who insisted on using real progesterone were forced to buy it in an injectable
form. As a result, solubility became an issue. Progesterone is extremely
insoluble in water, and, though it is vastly more soluble in vegetable oil
than in water, it does not stay in solution at room temperature even at the
low concentration of 1 part in 1000 parts of a typical vegetable oil.  

When people speak of an allergy to progesterone (or even to penicillin) they
generally are not aware of the presence of a very toxic solvent.(5) For a
time, progesterone was often sold dissolved in benzyl benzoate. The
Physician's Desk Reference warned of possible allergic reactions to
progesterone. Now, it is supposedly sold dissolved in vegetable oil, with
about 10% benzyl alcohol as--supposedly--a bacteriostatic agent.  

Bacteriostatic water contains 0.9% to 1.9% benzyl alcohol, and can
irreversibly harm nerves. (6,7) Its use in hospitals killed thousands of
babies. Awareness of benzyl alcohol's toxicity goes back to 1918 at least; it
was proposed as an effective insecticide, and was found to be toxic to many
animal systems. The safe systemic dose (7) is exceeded with an injection of
150 mg. of progesterone, yet the local concentration is far higher. It can
cause a severe reaction even when used at a lower concentration, in
bacteriostatic water. (5)  

Other alcohols, including ethanol, have been used as solvents, but since they
(ethanol even more than benzyl alcohol) have an affinity for water, the
solution decomposes in contact with tissue water.  

In spite of the toxicity of the vehicle, several beneficial effects can be
obtained with injected progesterone, in serious conditions such as epilepsy or
caner of the breast or uterus. Many researchers have commented on the very
obvious difficulty of giving very large amounts of progesterone. (8) My
comparisons of oral progesterone in tocopherol with other forms and methods of
administration show a roughly similar efficiency for oral and inject
progesterone, and about 1/20 the effect for suppositories. Crystals of
progesterone are visible in the suppositories I have examined, and this
material is obviously wasted.  

An old theory of vitamin E's mechanism of action in improving fertility was
that it spares progesterone.(9) It is established that some of the effects of
vitamin E and progesterone are similar, for example, both prevent oxygen waste
and appear to improve mitochondrial coupling of phosphorylation with
respiration. I suspected that if they actually both work at the same
mitochondrial site, then they must have a high mutual solubility.  

Knowing the long-standing problem of administering large doses of progesterone
without a toxic solvent, I applied for and was granted a patent for the
composition of progesterone in tocopherol. One of my reasons for publishing in
the form of patents is that I have had many years of experience in having my
discoveries taken up by others without acknowledgment, if they are compatible
with conventional prejudices. Typically, an editor rejects a paper, and then a
few months later publishes a very similar paper by someone else. My
dissertation research, which established that an estrogen excess kills the
embryo by suffocation, and that progesterone protects the embryo by promoting
the delivery of both oxygen and glucose, didn't strike a responsive chord in
the journals which are heavily influenced by funds from the drug industry.  

According to a consultant for a major medical journal, the idea  of
dissolving progesterone, a fat soluble steroid hormone, in vitamin E which is
then incorporated into chylomicrons absorbed via the lymphatics, and thus
avoids the liver on the so called first pass is so simple it is amazing that
the pharmaceutical companies have not jumped on it. (A more sophisticated
writer might have said  stomped on it.)

In the powder form, direct and intimate contact with a mucous membrane allows
lipid phase to lipid phase transfer of progesterone molecules. Instead of by-
passing the liver, much of the progesterone is picked up in the portal
circulation, where a major part of it is glucuronidated, and made water
soluble for prompt excretion.  

Since this glucuronide form cross-reacts to some extent with the ordinary
progesterone in the assay process, and since 50% of the ordinary free
progesterone is carried inside the red blood cells (10,11), and 50% is
associated with proteins in the plasma, while the glucuronide hardly enters
the red blood cells at all, it is better to judge by clinical efficacy when
comparing different oral forms. My comparisons show several times higher
potency in the tocopherol composition than in powder form.  

Since progesterone's use as a drug antedates the 1938 law requiring special
federal approval, its legal status is similar to that of thyroid hormone.
Unfortunately, for both thyroid and progesterone, there is a tendency to cut
corners for the sake of a bigger profit margin.  

For example, steroid acetates are generally a little cheaper than the simple
natural steroid. Some people assume that an acetate or butyrate can be
substituted for the steroid itself. This can cause dangerous reactions.

Medroxyprogesterone acetate is considered a progestin (though it is not
supportive of gestation), because it modifies the uterus in approximately the
wasy progesterone does, but it is luteolytic, and lowers the ovaries'
production of progesterone while progesterone itself has a positive effect on
the corpus luteum, stimulating progesterone synthesis. Defining progestin in
a narrow way allows many synthetics to be sold as progestogens, though some of
them are strongly estrogenic, allowing them to function as contraceptives--it
is odd that contraceptives and agents which suppress progesterone synthesis
should be officially called supported of pregnancy. It is probably partly
the acetate group in the medroxyprogesterone acetate molecule which makes it
bind firmly to receptors, yet causes it to block the enzymes which would
normally be involved in progesterone metabolism. (I think testosterone, even,
might be a safer progestin than medroxyprogesterone acetate.) Pregnenolone
acetate similarly blocks the enzymes which normally metabolize pregnenolone.
(12) In aspirin, it has been found that it is the acetyl group which (by a
free radical action) blocks an enzyme involved in prostaglandin synthesis.  

If the category called progestogens or progestins is to be defined on the
basis of a single tissue reaction, then it is possible to classify
progesterone with the toxic synthetic substances, but then it becomes highly
deceptive to imply that progesterone is **_just_** a progestin, or that it has
any of the **_other properties_** of the toxic synthetics, but this continues
to be done. The warnings about progestins causing birth defects, for
example, cause epileptic women t use conventional anti-seizure drugs (all of
which cause birth defects) during pregnancy, and to avoid natural
progesterone, which generally could control their seizures. Thus, a false
message attached to progesterone creates precisely the harm it claims to want
to prevent. In my communications with the regulatory agencies, I have
concluded that their attempts to deceive are too blatant to ascribe to
incompetence. Whether it's the Forest Service the FDA, the principle is the
same: The regulatory agencies have been captured by the regulated industries.  

Another place to cut costs is in the tocopherol. Tocopherol acetate does have
vitamin E activity, but sine it is only about half as efficiently absorbed as
the simple tocopherol (13), it is a mistake to save a few dollars an ounce, at
the expense of losing half of the therapeutic effect. People who have compared
natural progesterone in natural tocopherols with other compositions have
insisted that the other compositions must not contain progesterone.  

The taste of natural vitamin E is stronger than that of the synthetic forms,
but since the mixture is absorbed by any tissue it contacts, including various
parts of the bowel, it can be taken in a capsule. If a small amount of olive
oil is used with it, absorption through the skin is very rapid. Many women use
it vaginally, spread onto a diaphragm, to hold it in contact with the
membranes. The efficiency of absorption by all routes is so high that patients
should be warned against its anesthetic effect, until their dosage requirement
is known approximately. Some physicians prefer concentrations higher than 10%,
but the risk of accidental drunkenness or anesthesia is higher with the
stronger solutions.  

It is an indication of the tocopherol solution's high availability that
medical researchers such as Roy Hertz (8), who thought they were administering
maximal doses by combining injections with suppositories, never mentioned the
problem of an anesthetic effect from an overdose. Similarly, it si evidence of
the extremely poor availability of the micropulverized progesterone that the
researchers have administered hundreds of milligrams per day, without
mentioning the symptoms of an overdose. Because of the difficulties involved
in scientifically studying the clinical effectiveness of various formulations,
I think the most practical way of evaluating the effectiveness of different
progesterone formulations is to measure the amount extractable from the red
blood cells, a few hours after the peak serum level has been reached. This
will reasonably reflect the amounts reaching brain cells, adrenal glands, and
the various other cells on which progesterone has its therapeutic action.  

REFERENCES  

1\. A A. Gidley-Baird, et aI., Failure of implantation in human in vitro
fertilization and embryo transfer patients: the effects of altered
progesterone/estrogen ratios in humans and mice, Fertility and Sterility
45(1): 69-74, 1986.

2\. J. L. Yovich, et aI., Early luteal serum progesterone concentrations are
higher in pregnancy cycles, Fertility and Sterility 44 (1): 185-189, 1985.

3\. C. Djerassi, The making of the pill, Science 84: 127-129, 1984.

4\. R. Kehl, Les Glandes Endocrines, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris,
1952.

5\. J. A. Grant, et aI., New England Journal of Medicine 306(2): 108, 1982,
Unsuspected benzyl alcohol hypersensitivity.

6\. T. E. Feasby, et aI., Neurotoxicity of bacteriostatic water, New England
Journal of Medicine 308(6): 966-7, 1983.

7\. E. T. Kimura, et aI., Parenteral toxicity studies with benzyl
a1cohol,Toxicol Appl Pharmacol18: 60-68, 1971.

8\. A. White, editor, Symposium on Steroids in Experimental and Clinical
Practice, The Blakiston Co., N.Y., 1951, p. 401.

9\. A. Fraschini, II Metodo Biologico di Rinvigorimento, Edizioni Minerva
Medica, Milan, 1954.

10\. E. Mulder, et aI., Metabolism of free and conjugated steroids by intact
and haemolysed mammalian erythrocytes, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 263: _290-297,_
1972.

11\. M. Holzbauer, The association of steroids with blood cells in vivo, J. of
Steroid Biochemistry 3: 579-592, 1972.

12\. S. Lieberman, et aI., A heuristic proposal for understanding
steroidogenic processes, Endocrine Reviews 5(1): 128-148, 1984.

13\. L. J. Machlin and E. Gabriel, Kinetics of tissue alpha-tocopherol uptake
and depletion, following administration of high levels of

vitamin E, p. 48 in annals of the N.Y. Academy of Science 393,B. Lubin and I.
J. Machlin, editors, New York, 1982.  
  

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2007. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  

