![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

=============================

"...simultaneous treatment of intact...rats with testosterone and
estradiol-17beta for 16 weeks consistenly induced a putative precancerous
lesion, termed dysplasia, in the dorsolateral prostate of all animals. Since
treatment of rats with androgen alone did not elicit the same response, we
concluded that estrogen played a critical role in the genesis of this
proliferative lesion." Shuk-mei Ho and M. Yu, in "Selective increase in type
II estrogen-binding sites in the dysplastic dorsolateral prostates of Noble
rats," Cancer Research 53, 528-532, 1993.

=============================

# Prostate Cancer

It was noticed several decades ago that estrogen causes the prostate gland to
enlarge in experimental animals, but by then an oversimplified view of the sex
hormones was already well established, that led people to say that "estrogen
causes the female organs to grow, and testosterone causes the male organs to
grow." Logically extending this mistaken idea led many of the same people to
suppose that the "hormones of one sex would inhibit the growth of the
reproductive organs of the other sex."

When a friend of mine was told he had prostate cancer, though he had had no
symptoms, and should receive large doses of estrogen, I reviewed the
literature, to see whether his doctor might have seen something I had
neglected. Since that time, I have found it necessary to use quotation marks
around the phrases "medical research" and "medical science," because there is
a certain kind of "research" performed within the medical profession which is
peculiar to that profession.

When I read through the studies cited by the current articles as the basis for
using estrogen to treat prostate cancer, I saw that the decisive "research"
had consisted of mailing a questionnaire to physicians asking them if they
thought it was reasonable to administer estrogen to these patients on the
basis of its opposition to testosterone, which was considered to be
responsible for the growth of the prostate gland. Many physicians answered the
questionnaire affirmatively.

If the questioner's purpose was to determine his legal status in using a
treatment, his research method was appropriate, to see whether the treatment
seemed reasonable to others in the profession. Legally, a physician is safe if
he can count on others to testify that his practice is standard.
Unfortunately, for generations his study of the opinions of his peers became
the "evidence" of the value of the estrogen treatment. Phrases such as "it is
indicated," "treatment of choice," and "standard practice" are used in
medicine, as part of the pseudo-scientific mystique of the profession.
Physicans who attempt to base their practice on methods that have a sound
scientific basis are likely to find that they are violating the norms of their
profession.

More than 25 years ago, when I started pointing out that deliberate
misrepresentation had been involved in the continued designation of estrogen
as "the female hormone," used as a basis for "hormone replacement therapies,"
I saw that it was hard for people to sustain a critical attitude toward
language. Language is prior to judgment, law, science, reason. Those who
define the terms set the rules.

By the mid-1980s, some studies had shown that estrogen treatment didn't
prolong the survival of prostate cancer patients at all, but it was argued
that the patients who received estrogen were happier than those who didn't.

Apparently, many physicians who were experts in conventional cancer treatment
hadn't been impressed by the happiness of their patients who were receiving
estrogen, because a survey at a conference of physicians found that many of
them would choose to have no treatment if they learned they had prostate
cancer. And more recently, there have been recommendations that older patients
shouldn't be treated aggressively, because their cancers are usually so slow
growing that they are likely to die of something else related to old age.

In spite of the articles I showed my friend, and my warning that estrogen can
cause strokes and heart attacks, he decided to take the estrogen treatment.
Within a few days he began suffering from asthma and disturbed sleep. Then he
had a series of strokes and died.

Since it was known that estrogen treatment was dangerous for men, and that it
increases blood clotting and vascular spasms, there had to be some overriding
belief that led to its general use in treating prostate cancer. That belief
seems to be that "estrogen, the female hormone, opposes testosterone, the male
hormone, which is responsible for the growth--and therefore for the
cancerization--of the prostate gland." Everything is wrong with that sentence,
but you can find every part of the belief present and functioning in the
medical literature. Just to give some context to the association of growth and
cancerization, I should mention that Otto Warburg observed that all of the
carcinogenic factors he studied caused tissue atrophy before cancer appeared.
Another important contextual point is that every hormone does many things, and
every endocrine gland produces multiple hormones.

Since the time of Brown-Sequard and Eugen Steinach, it has been accepted that
declining testicular function is a common feature of aging, and testosterone
was probably the first hormone that was clearly found to decrease consistently
with aging. (Vermeulen, et al., 1972, 1979.)

It has seemed odd to many people that enlargement of the prostate should occur
mainly in older men, if testosterone is the hormone that causes its growth,
and estrogen is antagonistic to its growth. The nature of the growth of the
old man's prostate is very different from its natural growth in youth.

It was also recognized decades ago that estrogen rises in men during old age
(Pirke and Doerr, 1975), as it rises in stress, disease, malnutrition, and
hypothyroidism (which are also associated with old age). Estrogen is produced
in fat (Siiteri, and MacDonald, 1973, Vermeulen, 1976) which tends to increase
with age, when thyroid and progesterone are deficient. The conversion of
testosterone to estrogen occurs in the testicle itself, but this conversion is
also inhibited by the favorable hormonal environment of youth. The active
thyroid hormone, T3, declines with aging, and this necessarily lowers
production of pregnenolone and progesterone. Increasingly, in both sexes, it
appears that DHEA may rise during stress as a result of a deficiency of
thyroid, progesterone, and pregnenolone.

In 1786, John Hunter reported that castration causes a decrease in the size of
the prostate gland, and by the end of the 19th century castration was being
advocated for treating enlargement of the prostate. In aging men, the prostate
gland (both central and peripheral zones) atrophies, and it is within the
atrophic gland that cancer cells can be found. Nodular, noncancerous
enlargement may occur, with or without cancer. In 1935, an autopsy study
showed carcinoma in the prostates of 30% of men by the age of 50.
Proliferation of ductal and epithelial tissue is closely associated with
prostate cancer, a situation similar to that of the cancerous or precancerous
breast. (Simpson, et al., 1982; Wellings, et al., 1975; Jensen, et al., 1976.)
The high probability of "epitheliosis" in association with cancer was seen in
women in their early 40s, and in women over 60. (Simpson, et al.)
(Epitheliosis just refers to an exaggerated proliferation of epithelial cells,
the cells covering all surfaces, including the lining of glands, and things as
simple as irritation and vitamin A deficiency can cause these cells to
proliferate.) In the breast, the proliferative epitheliosis is clearly caused
by estrogenic stimulation. The antagonism between estrogen and vitamin A in
controlling epithelial proliferation (and possibly other cell types: Boettger-
Tong and Stancel, 1995) is clear wherever it has been tested; vitamin A
restrains epithelial proliferation. (Wherever estrogen is a factor in the
development of abnormal tissue, vitamin A supplementation would seem
beneficial.)

In aging women and men, as the breasts and prostate atrophy, their
estrogen/antiestrogen ratio increases.

In men with prostate cancer, the fluid secreted by the prostate contains
significantly more estradiol than the fluid from men without cancer (Rose, et
al., 1984). This is analogous to observations made in women with breast
cancer.

The pituitary hormones have diverse functons, including effects on epithelial
tissues, other than their "classical" functions. Growth hormone, ACTH (Lostroh
and Li, 1957), and ACTH with prolactin (Tullner, 1963) stimulate prostate
growth. Prolactin--which is increased by estrogen--stimulates growth of the
rat's lateral prostate (Holland and Lee, 1980), and stimulates the growth of
human prostate epithelial cells in vitro (Syms, et al., 1985). LH (luteinizing
hormone) increases when progesterone or testosterone is deficient, and growth
hormone and prolactin (which are closely associated in evolution) both
increase under a variety of stressful situations, and with estrogenic
stimulation. Prostate cancer patients who had higher levels of LH and lower
testosterone died most quickly. (Harper, et al., 1984.) Also, a high ratio of
testosterone to estradiol or of testosterone to prolactin corresponded to
better survival (Rannikko, et al., 1981.) Considered separately, patients with
higher testosterone levels had a better prognosis than those with lower
levels, and patients with lower growth hormone levels did better than those
with higher growth hormone levels. (Wilson, et al., 1985.) Has anyone ever
tried testosterone therapy for prostate cancer? Or, more practically, a
generalized antiestrogenic therapy, using thyroid, progesterone, and
pregnenolone? Other drugs (naloxone, bromocriptine, gonadotropin-releasing
hormone agonists, and anti-growth hormone druges, e.g.) are available to
regulate the pituitary hormones, and might be useful therapeutically or
preventively. (See Blaakaer, et al., 1995.) Biskind and Biskind's work (1944)
with ovarian tumors might be relevant to both testicular and prostate cancer.

Abnormal patterns of pituitary hormones reflect stress and hormonal imbalance,
but they are also directly involved in widespread changes in tissue content of
glycoproteins. The prostate is specialized to secrete large amounts of mucin.
The endocrine physiology of prostate mucin secretion is poorly understood, but
it is likely that there are interactions between growth-regulatory and
secretion-regulatory systems.

In recent years, prostate cancer has been one of the fastest increasing kinds
of cancer, and it isn't apparent that increased treatment has had an effect in
lowering the death rate. The postwar baby-boom (following the baby-bust of the
great depression) created an abnormal age-structure of the population, that
has been used to argue that the war against cancer is being won. Increasing
environmental estrogens are known to cause many reproductive abnormalities,
and their contribution to prostate cancer would get more attention if
estrogen's role in prostate disease were better known. Environmental estrogens
are clearly responsible for genital deformities and sterility in many species
of wild animals, but when the causal link is made between estrogens and human
abnormalities, the estrogen industry sends its shills in to create controversy
and confusion. Even the effects of estrogens in sewage, known for decades, are
treated as State Secrets: "There had been reports of hermaphroditic fishes in
one or two rivers, and government investigators had been studying them since
the late 1970s. But no one had been aware of the work because it was
classified." (Lutz, 1996.)

Testicular cancer is easy to diagnose, and its incidence has clearly increased
(100% in white men, 200% in black men) since 1950. Undescended testicles,
urethral abnormalities, etc., similar to those seen in DES sons and in wild
animals, have also increased. So the tremendous increase in the death rate
from prostate cancer during the same time has a meaningful context.

Although the animal studies showed that estrogen treatment promotes
enlargement of the prostate, it was possible to suppose that the human
prostate's growth might be stimulated only by testosterone, until tests were
done in vitro to determine the effects of hormones on cell division.

In human prostate slices, several hormones (including insulin, and probably
prolactin) stimulated cell division; testosterone did not, under these
experimental conditions. (McKeehan, et al., 1984.) Contrary to the stereotyped
ideas, there are suggestions that supplementary androgens could control
prostate cancer (Umekita, et al., 1996), and that antagonists to prolactin and
estrogen might be appropriately used in hormonal therapy (for example, Wennbo,
et al., 1997; Lane, et al., 1997).

By the age of 50, men often show an excess of both prolactin and estrogen, and
a deficiency of thyroid and testosterone. This is the age at which enlargement
of the prostate often becomes noticeable.

Estrogen's role in prostate growth and cancerization is clear:
"...simultaneous treatment of intact...rats with testosterone and
estradiol-17beta for 16 weeks consistenly induced a putative precancerous
lesion, termed dysplasia, in the dorsolateral prostate of all animals. Since
treatment of rats with androgen alone did not elicit the same response, we
concluded that estrogen played a critical role in the genesis of this
proliferative lesion." (Ho and Yu.)

Progesterone and pregnenolone also decline in aging men. Several studies using
synthetic progestins have shown that they effectively shrink the hypertrophic
prostate, and the saw palmetto remedy for prostate enlargement has been
reported to contain pregnenolone, or something similar to it. These materials
might be expected to reduce conversion of testosterone or other androgens to
estrogen.

The prostaglandins were discovered in prostatic fluid, where they occur in
significant concentrations. They are so deeply involved with the development
of cancers of all sorts that aspirin and other prostaglandin inhibitors should
be considered as a basic part of cancer therapy. The prostaglandins have local
and systemic effects that promote cancer growth. ("The prostaglandins and
related eicosanoids synthesized from polyunsaturated fatty acid precursors
have been implicated as modulators of tumor metastasis, host immunoregulation,
tumor promotion, and cell proliferation." Hubbard, et al., 1988.)

Estrogens cause elevation of free fatty acids, and there are many interactions
between the unsaturated fatty acids and estrogen, including their metabolism
to prostaglandins, and their peroxidation. Estrogen's roles as free-radical
promoter, DNA toxin, carcinogen, tumor promotor, modifier of tissue growth
factors, anti-thymic hormone, etc., as well as its local effects on the
prostate gland, have to be kept in mind. Most of the interest in studying
estrogen's contributions to prostate cancer relates to the existence of
estrogen receptors in various parts of the prostate. While that is
interesting, it tends to distract attention from the fact that many of
estrogen's most important actions don't involve the "receptors." A direct
excitatory action on prostate cells, and indirect actions by way of the
pituitary, pancreas, thyroid, adrenal, fatty acids, prostaglandins, histamine
and circulation are probably essential parts of the cancerization process.

The unsaturated fatty acids, but not the saturated fatty acids, free estrogen
from the serum proteins that bind it, and increase its availability and
activity in tissue cells.

Thyroid supplementation, adequate animal protein, trace minerals, and vitamin
A are the first things to consider in the prevention of prostate hypertrophy
and cancer. Nutritional and endocrine support can be combined with rational
anticancer treatments, since there is really no sharp line between different
approaches that are aimed at achieving endocrine and immunological balance,
without harming anything.

Avoiding tissue atrophy is very closely related to promoting healthy
regeneration. These processes require efficient energy production, and an
appropriate balance between stimulation and resources. Growth hormone is
sometimes recommend to correct tissue atrophy, but the evidence seems
reasonably clear that it is a factor in the promotion of tumefaction of the
prostate. The only study I have seen suggesting that it might be beneficial in
prostatic cancer was a 14 day experiment done in female rats. Numerous
publications suggest that blocking growth hormone is beneficial in treating
prostate cancer; in future newsletters I will be discussing the evidence that
growth hormone, like estrogen, cortisol, and unsaturated fats, tends to
promote degenerative changes of aging - [Growth hormone: Hormone of Stress,
Aging, and Death?](http://raypeat.com/articles/articles/growth-hormone.shtml)

REFERENCES

M.C. Audy, et al., "17beta-Estradiol stimulates a rapid Ca2+ influx in LNCaP
human prostate cancer cells," Eur. J. Endocrionol.135, 367-373, 1996.

M. S. Biskind and G. S. Biskind, "Development of tumors in the rat ovary after
transplantation into the spleen," Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 55, 176-179,
1944.

J. Blaakaer, et al., "Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist suppression of
ovarian tumorigenesis in mice of the Wx/Wv genotype," Biol. of Reprod. 53,
775-779, 1995.

Clinton, SK Mulloy AL, Li SP, Mangian HJ, Visek WJ, J Nutr 1997
Feb;127(2):225-237 "Dietary fat and protein intake differ in modulation of
prostate tumor growth, prolactin secretion and metabolism, and prostate gland
prolactin binding capacity in rats."

J. R. Drago, "The induction of Nb rat prostatic carcinomas," Anticancer Res.
4, 255-256, 1984.

J. Geller, et al., "The effect of cyproterone acetate on adenocarcinoma of the
prostate," Surg. Gynec. Obst. 127, 748-758, 1968.

J. Geller, J. Fishman, and T. L. Cantor, "Effect of cyproterone acetate on
clinical, endocrine and pathological features of benign prostatic
hypertrophy," J. Steroid Biochemistry 6, 837-843, 1975.

Ho, Shuk-mei, and M. Yu, "Selective increase in type II estrogen-binding sites
in the dysplastic dorsolateral prostates of Noble rats," Cancer Research 53,
528-532, 1993. "...simultaneous treatment of intact...rats with testosterone
and estradiol-17beta for 16 weeks consistenly induced a putative precancerous
lesion, termed dysplasia, in the dorsolateral prostate of all animals. Since
treatment of rats with androgen alone did not elicit the same response, we
concluded that estrogen played a critical role in the genesis of this
proliferative lesion."

M. E. Harper, et al., "Carcinoma of the prostate: relationship of pretreatment
hormone levels to survival," Eur. J. Cancer Clin. Oncol. 20, 477-482, 1984.

J. M. Holland and C. Lee, "Effects of pituitary grafts on testosterone
stimulated growth of rat prostate," Biol. Reprod. 22, 351-355, 1980.

W. C. Hubbard, et al., "Profiles of prostaglandin biosynthesis in sixteen
established cell lines derived from human lung, colon, prostate, and ovarian
tumors," Cancer Research 48, 4770-4775, 1988. "The prostaglandins and related
eicosanoids synthesized from polyunsaturated fatty acid precursors have been
implicated as modulators of tumor metastasis, host immunoregulation, tumor
promotion, and cell proliferation."

Izes JK, Zinman LN, Larsen CR, Urology 1996 May;47(5):756-759 "Regression of
large pelvic desmoid tumor by tamoxifen and sulindac," "A 54-year-old man was
evaluated for symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction. Evaluation revealed a 10
by 9.8-cm tumor composed of bland, fibroblastic, poorly cellular material
adjacent to the prostate. Administration of a course of antiestrogen
(tamoxifen) and a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent (sulindac) resulted in
prompt relief of symptoms and a slow decrease in the size of the tumor as
measured by computed tomography. After 54 months of therapy, the tumor was
undetectable clinically and dramatically reduced in size as seen on computed
tomography. Data on the natural history of desmoid tumors and the efficacy of
various therapeutic strategies are reviewed.

Jungwirth A, Schally AV, Pinski J, Halmos G, Groot K, Armatis P, Vadillo-
Buenfil M., Br J Cancer 1997;75(11):1585-1592, "Inhibition of in vivo
proliferation of androgen-independent prostate cancers by an antagonist of
growth hormone-releasing hormone."

Kroes R; Teppema JS Development and restitution of squamous metaplasia in the
calf prostate after a single estrogen treatment. An electron microscopic
study. Mol Pathol, 1972 Jun, 16:3, 286-301.

Lane KE, Leav I, Ziar J, Bridges RS, Rand WM, Ho SM, Carcinogenesis 1997
Aug;18(8):1505-1510 "Suppression of testosterone and estradiol-17beta-induced
dysplasia in the dorsolateral prostate of Noble rats by bromocriptine." "We,
and others, have previously described the histological changes that occur in
the prostate gland of intact Noble (NBL) rats following prolonged hormonal
treatment. Dysplasia, a pre-neoplastic lesion, develops specifically in the
dorsolateral prostates (DLPs) of NBL rats treated for 16 weeks with a combined
regimen of testosterone (T) and estradiol-17beta (E2) (T + E2-treated rats).
Concurrent with DLP dysplasia induction, the dual hormone regimen also elicits
hyperprolactinemia, in addition to an elevation of nuclear type II estrogen
binding sites (type II EBS), no alteration in estrogen receptors (ER), and
marked epithelial cell proliferation in the dysplastic foci. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether the dual hormone action is mediated via
E2-induced hyperprolactinemia. Bromocriptine (Br), at a dose of 4 mg/kg body
wt per day, was used to suppress pituitary prolactin (PRL) release. Serum PRL
levels were lowered from values of 341 +/- 50 ng/ml in T + E2-treated rats to
32 +/- 10 ng/ml in Br co-treated animals. The latter values were comparable to
those in untreated control rats. In addition, Br co-treatment effectively
inhibited the evolution of dysplasia (six out of eight rats) and the often
associated inflammation (five out of eight rats) in most animals. In contrast,
Br co-treatment did not suppress the T + E2-induced type II EBS elevation nor
alter ER levels in the DLPs of these rats, when compared with T + E2-treated
rats. These data extend the many previous studies that have detailed marked
influences of PRL on rat prostatic functions. However, the current study is
the first to implicate PRL in prostatic dysplasia induction in vivo."

I. Leav, et al., "Biopotentiality of response to sex hormones by the prostate
of castrated or hypophysectomized dogs: Direct effects of estrogen," Am. J.
Pathol., 93, 69-92, 1978.

H. C. Levine, et al., "Effects of the addition of estrogen to medical
castration on prostatic size, symptoms, histology and serum prostate specific
antigen in 4 men with benign prostatic hypertrophy," J. Urol. 146, 790-93,
1991.

Diana Lutz, The Sciences, January/February 1996.

W. L. McKeehan, et al., "Direct mitogenic effects of insulin, epidermal growth
factor, glucocorticoid, cholera toxin, unknown pituitary factors and possibly
prolactin,but not androgen, on normal rat prostate epithelial cells in serum-
free, primary cell culture," Cancer Res. 44(5), 1998-2010, 1984.

Nevalainen MT, Valve EM, Ingleton PM, Nurmi M, Martikainen PM, Harkonen PL, J
Clin Invest 1997 Feb 15;99(4):618-627 "Prolactin and prolactin receptors are
expressed and functioning in human prostate." "The highest density of
prolactin receptors was detected in the secretory epithelial cells by
immunohistochemistry. Finally, we report that prolactin is locally produced in
human prostate epithelium, as evidenced by marked prolactin immunoreactivity
in a significant portion of prostate epithelial cells, with parallel
expression of prolactin mRNA in human prostate. Collectively, these data
provide significant support for the existence of an autocrine/paracrine loop
of prolactin in the human prostate and may shed new light on the involvement
of prolactin in the etiology and progression of neoplastic growth of the
prostate."

A. J. Lostroh and C. H. Li, "Stimulation of the sex accessories of
hypophysectomised male rat by non-gonadotrophin hormones of the pituitary
gland," Acta endocr. Copenh. 25, 1-16, 1957.

F. B. Merk, et al., "Multiple phenotypes of prostatic glandular cells in
castrated dogs after individual or combined treatment with androgen and
estrogen," Lab. Invest. 54, 42-46, 1986.

Pirke, K.M. and P. Doerr, "Age related changes in free plasma testosterone,
dihydrotesterone, and oestradiol," Acta endocr. Copenh. 89, 171-178, 1975

S. Rannikko, et al., "Hormonal patterns in prostatic cancer 1. Correlation
with local extent of tumour, presence of metastases and grade of
differentiation," Acta endocr. Copenh. 98, 625-633, 1981.

P. H. Rolland, et al., "Prostaglandins in human breast cancer: Evidence
suggesting that an elevated prostaglandin production is a marker of metastatic
potential for neoplastic cells," J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 64, 1061-1070, 1980.

D. P. Rose, et al., "Hormone levels in prostatic fluid from healthy Finns and
prostate cancer patients," Eur. J. Cancer clin. Oncol. 20, 1317-1319, 1984.

L. M. Schuman, et al., "Epidemiologic study of prostatic cancer: Preliminary
report," Cancer Treat. Rep. 61, 181-186, 1977.

Siiteri, P.K. and P. C. MacDonald, "Role of extraglandular estrogen in human
endocrinology," In Handbook of Physiology, section 7, Endocrinology Vol II
(Eds. S. R. Geiger, et al.,) pp. 615-629, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.

H. W. Simpson, et al., "Bimodal age-frequency distribution of epitheliosis in
cancer mastectomies, Cancer 50, 2417-2422, 1982; S. R. Wellings, et al.,
"Atlas of subgross pathology of the human breast with special reference to
possible precancerous lesions," J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 55, 231-273, 1975; H. M.
Jensen, et al., "Preneoplastic lesions in the human breast," Science, N.Y.
191, 295-297,1976.

Sugimura Y, Sakurai M, Hayashi N, Yamashita A, Kawamura J., Prostate
1994;24(1):24-32 "Age-related changes of the prostate gland in the senescence-
accelerated mouse." "Wet weight and numbers of ductal tips in ventral and
dorsolateral prostate glands in senescence accelerated-prone (SA-P) mice were
significantly smaller than those of senescence accelerated-resistant (SA-R)
mice, although the changes of patterns of gross ductal morphology were
virtually identical in these groups. High incidence of stromal hyperplasia
with fibrosis and inflammation was observed...." "These data suggest that the
aging process occurs heterogeneously within the prostate gland, and that SA-P
mice may be an important model for the study of age-related changes in the
prostate gland."

W. W. Tullner, "Hormonal factors in the adrenal-dependent growth of the rat
ventral prostate," Nat. Cancer Inst. Monograph 12, 211-223, 1963.

Umekita Y, Hiipakka RA, Kokontis JM, Liao S, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 Oct
15;93(21):11802-11807 "Human prostate tumor growth in athymic mice: inhibition
by androgens and stimulation by finasteride," "When the human prostate cancer
cell line, LNCaP 104-S, the growth of which is stimulated by physiological
levels of androgen, is cultured in androgen-depleted medium for > 100
passages, the cells, now called LNCaP 104-R2, are proliferatively repressed by
low concentrations of androgens. LNCaP 104-R2 cells formed tumors in castrated
male athymic nude mice. Testosterone propionate (TP) treatment prevented LNCaP
104-R2 tumor growth and caused regression of established tumors in these mice.
Such a tumor-suppressive effect was not observed with tumors derived from
LNCaP 104-S cells or androgen receptor-negative human prostate cancer PC-3
cells. 5 alpha-Dihydrotestosterone, but not 5 beta-dihydrotesto- sterone, 17
beta-estradiol, or medroxyprogesterone acetate, also inhibited LNCaP 104-R2
tumor growth. Removal of TP or implantation of finasteride, a 5 alpha-
reductase inhibitor, in nude mice bearing TP implants resulted in the regrowth
of LNCaP 104-R2 tumors. Within 1 week after TP implantation, LNCaP 104-R2
tumors exhibited massive necrosis with severe hemorrhage. Three weeks later,
these tumors showed fibrosis with infiltration of chronic inflammatory cells
and scattered carcinoma cells exhibiting degeneration. TP treatment of mice
with LNCaP 104-R2 tumors reduced tumor androgen receptor and c-myc mRNA levels
but increased prostate-specific antigen in serum- and prostate-specific
antigen mRNA in tumors. Although androgen ablation has been the standard
treatment for metastatic prostate cancer for > 50 years, our study shows that
androgen supplementation therapy may be beneficial for treatment of certain
types of human prostate cancer and that the use of 5 alpha-reductase
inhibitors, such as finasteride or anti-androgens, in the general treatment of
metastatic prostate cancer may require careful assessment."

A. Vermeulen, "Testicular hormonal secretion and aging in males," in Benign
prostatic hyperplasia (J. T. Grayhack, et al., eds), pp. 177-182, DHEW Publ.
No. (NIH) 76-1113, 1976.

A. Vermeulen, et al., "Testosterone secretion and metabolism in male
senescence," J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 34, 730-735, 1972.

A. Vermeulen, et al., "Hormonal factors related to abnormal growth of the
prostate," in Prostate Cancer (D. S. Coffey and J. T. Issacs, eds). UICC
Technical Workshop Series, Vol 48, 81-92, UICC, Geneva.

S. Zuckerman and J. R. Groome, "The aetiology of benign enlargement of the
prostate in the dog," J. Pathol. Bact. 44, 113-124, 1937.

B. Zumoff, et al., "Abnormal levels of plasma hormones in men with prostate
cancer: Evidence toward a 'time-defense' theory," The Prostate 3, 579-588,
1982.

M. Wehling, "Non-genomic steroid action--take a closer look, it's not rare!"
Eur. J. of Endorinol. 135, 287-288, 1996.

Wennbo H, Kindblom J, Isaksson OG, Tornell J., Endocrinology 1997
Oct;138(10):4410-4415. "Transgenic mice overexpressing the prolactin gene
develop dramatic enlargement of the prostate gland," "An altered endocrine
status of elderly men has been hypothesized to be important for development of
prostate hyperplasia. The present study addresses the question whether
increased PRL expression is of importance for development of prostate
hyperplasia in mice. Three lines of PRL transgenic mice were generated having
serum levels of PRL of approximately 15 ng/ml, 100 ng/ml, and 250 ng/ml,
respectively. These mice developed dramatic enlargement of the prostate gland,
approximately 20 times the normal prostate weight and they had a 4- to 5-fold
increased DNA content. Histologically, the prostate glands in the transgenic
mice were distended from secretion, and the amount of interstitial tissue was
increased. The levels oftestosterone and IGF-I were increased in the PRL
transgenic animals. In mice overexpressing the bovine GH gene, displaying
elevated IGF-I levels, the prostate gland was slightly larger compared with
normal mice, indicating that the effect of PRL was not primarily mediated
through elevated plasma IGF-I levels. "The present study suggests that PRL is
an important factor in the development of prostate hyperplasia acting directly
on the prostate gland or via increased plasma levels of testosterone."

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2013. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

