![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Regeneration and degeneration:  
Types of inflammation change with aging**

For about 100 years it has been popular to explain the degenerative diseases
as the result of mutations in the genes, a slow accumulation of somatic
mutations, as opposed to the germ cell mutations that are involved in
Huntingtons chorea and sickle cell anemia. Some people explained all the
changes of aging on the same basis, but 50 years ago, the somatic mutation
theory of aging was clearly shown to be false. The gene-mutation theory of
cancer is more persistent, but the work of people like Harry Rubin has made it
clear that functional changes in cells that are becoming cancerous destabilize
the chromosomes and cause defects to appear in the genes, rather than the
reverse.

  
Older ways of understanding aging and degenerative disease are now returning
to the foreground. The developmental interactions of the organism with its
environment, and the interactions of its cells, tissues, and organs with each
other, have again become the focus of biological aging research. In place of
the old belief that we are defined and limited by our genes, the new
perspective is showing us that we are limited by our environment, and that our
environment can be modified. As we react to unsuitable environments, our
internal environments become limiting for our cells, and instead of renewing
themselves, repairing damage, and preparing for new challenges, our cells find
themselves in blind alleys. Looking at aging in this way suggests that putting
ourselves into the right environments could prevent aging.

  
A bird developing inside its eggshell illustrates the way organs and the
environment interact. The chicken created a very good environment for the
early development of its young. When the egg is formed, it contains everything
needed to produce a chicken, except for oxygen and a steady warm temperature.
But before the chicks body has finished developing, using yolk fat for
energy, the glucose contained in the egg has been consumed, and at that point
the chicks brain stops growing. A researcher who knew that brain growth in
other kinds of animals requires glucose, injected glucose (or glycine) into
the developing eggs when the original glucose had been depleted. The
supplemental glucose allowed the chicks brain to continue growing until it
hatched. These chicks had larger brains, containing more numerous cells. The
same experimenters also found that progesterone increases brain size, while
corticosterone decreases it. Although the egg is a very good environment for
the development of chickens, these experiments showed that it isnt the best
that can be achieved. If the hens environment had been different, it might
have been able to provide as much glucose and progesterone as the
experimenters did.

  
Mammals were able to develop bigger brains than birds, by gestating their
offspring internally, allowing a continuous supply of nutrients, such as
glucose, and hormones such as progesterone. But the environment of the mother
still can profoundly affect the development of the offspring, by influencing
her physiology.

  
Another factor involved in developing a large brain is the metabolic rate,
which is closely associated with the temperature. Birds have larger brains
relative to their bodies than reptiles do, and birds maintain a consistently
high body temperature, sometimes as high as 110 degrees F, while reptiles
temperature varies somewhat according to the temperature of their surroundings
and their level of activity. Amphibians have much lower metabolic rates, and
are generally unable to live at the higher temperatures required by reptiles.

  
The high metabolic rate of a bird, combined with its development inside an
egg, means that compromises are made. The high rate of metabolism uses the
stored energy rapidly, so the growth of the brain is limited. But their very
high body temperature maximizes the effectiveness of that brain. Birds, such
as owls, parrots, and crows, that hatch in a less developed, more dependent
condition, are able to continue their brain growth, and have larger brains
than other birds, such as chickens. In birds and mammals, longevity generally
corresponds to brain size and metabolic rate. (For example, a pet crow, Tata,
died at the age of 59 in 2006 in New York; parrots sometimes live more than
100 years.) These (altricious) birds are the opposite of precocious, they
preserve embryonic or infantile traits into adulthood.

  
For whole organisms or for single cells, development depends on the adequacy
of the environment. Temperature and the quality of nourishment are important,
and by thinking about the other special features of the growth processes
during gestation, we might be able to find that some of the compromises that
are customarily made in our more mature lives arent necessary.  
One way of looking at aging is that its a failure of regeneration or healing,
related to changes in the nature of inflammation.

  
In childhood, wounds heal quickly, and inflammation is quickly resolved; in
extreme old age, or during extreme stress or starvation, wound healing is much
slower, and the nature of the inflammation and wound closure is different. In
the fetus, healing can be regenerative and scarless, for example allowing a
cleft palate to be surgically corrected without scars (Weinzweig, et al.,
2002).

  
Fifty years ago, inflammation was seen as a necessary part of the healing
process, but now it is recognized as a cause of heart disease, diabetes,
cancer, and aging itself. During the development of the organism, the nature
of healing changes, as the nature of inflammation changes. Early in life,
healing is regenerative or restorative, and there is little inflammation. In
adulthood as the amount of inflammation increases, healing fails to completely
restore lost structures and functions, resulting in scarring, the replacement
of functional tissue with fibrous tissue. Identifiable changes in the nature
of inflammation under different conditions can explain some of these losses of
healing capacity. Factors that limit inflammation and fibrosis, while
permitting tissue remodeling, could facilitate regeneration and retard aging.

  
Several cytokines (proteins that regulate cell functions) appear at much
higher concentrations in adult tissues than in fetal tissues (PDGF A, three
forms of TGF, IGF 1, and bFGF; Wagner, et al., 2007), and when one of these
(TGF-beta1) is added to the healing fetus, it produces inflammation and
fibrosis (Lanning, et al., 1999). Two prostaglandins, PGE2 and PGF2a, potently
produce inflammation in fetal rabbits, but not in adult rabbits. (Morykwas, et
al., 1994).

  
Tissue injury that would produce inflammation in adults causes other signals
in the fetus that activate repair processes. When a cell is injured or
stressed, for example when deprived of oxygen, it becomes incontinent, and
releases ATP into its surroundings. The extracellular ATP, and its breakdown
products, ADP, AMP, adenosine, and inorganic phosphate or pyrophosphate,
stimulate cells in various ways. ATP causes vasodilation, increasing
circulation, and usually signals cells to divide, and can activate stem cells
(Yu, et al., 2010) The lactic acid produced by distressed cells also has
signalling effects, including vasodilation and stimulated division. Stressed
cells digest their own proteins and other structural materials (autophagy),
and the breakdown products act as signals to guide the differentiation of
their replacement cells. Mobile phagocytes, ingesting the material of
decomposing cells, are essential for guiding tissue restoration.

  
In adults, prostaglandins are known to be involved in many of the harmful
effects of inflammation. They are formed from the polyunsaturated fats,
linoleic acid and arachidonic acid, which we are unable to synthesize
ourselves, so the adults exposure to the prostaglandins is influence by diet.
Since the fetus is able to synthesize fat from glucose, the newborn animal
usually contains a high proportion of saturated fats and their derivatives,
such as stearic acid, oleic acid, and Mead acid, which can be synthesized from
glucose or amino acids. Newborn calves have very little polyunsaturated fat in
their tissues, but even the small percentage of PUFA in milk causes its
tissues to gradually accumulate a higher percentage of PUFA as it matures. The
fatty acids of newborn humans, and other non-ruminants, reflect their mothers
diets more closely, but Mead acid is still present in human newborns (Al, et
al., 1990). In a study of prenatal learning (habituation rate), the
experimenters found that the relative absence of the supposedly essential
fatty acids improved the short term and long term memory of the fetus (Dirix,
et al., 2009). The size of the baby was found to be negatively associated with
the highly unsaturated fatty acids DHA and AA (Dirix, et al., 2009), showing a
general growth-retarding effect of these environmentally derived fats.

  
The embryo or fetus is enclosed in a germ-free environment, so it doesnt need
an immune system in the ordinary sense, but it does contain phagocytes,
which are an essential part of development, in the embryo, as well as in the
adult (Bukovky, et al., 2000). They are involved in removing malignant cells,
healing wounds, and remodeling tissues. In adults, the long-chain omega-3
fatty acids such as DHA are known to be immunosuppressive, but in tests on
monocytes from the umbilical cord blood of newborns, the highly unsaturated
fatty acids kill the monocytes that are so important for proper development
and regeneration (Sweeney, et al., 2001), and interfere with signals that
govern their migration (Ferrante, et al., 1994). DHA is now being sold with
many health claims, including the idea that adding it to baby formula will
improve their eyesight and intelligence. As the consumption of PUFA has
increased in the US and many other countries, the incidence of birth defects
has increased. The formation of excessive amounts of prostaglandin, or killing
macrophages, among other toxic effects, might be responsible for those visible
anatomical changes during growth, as well as for the subtler loss of
regenerative capacity.

  
In the adult, the PUFA and prostaglandins are known to increase collagen
synthesis. Serotonin and estrogen, which interact closely with PUFA, promote
collagen synthesis and fibrosis. In the fetus, hyaluronic acid, rather than
collagen, is the main extracellular material in wound repair (Krummel, et al.,
1987). Both it and its decomposition products have important regulatory
signal functions in wound healing (Gao, et al., 2008), inflammation, and
cell differentiation (Krasinski and Tchórzewski, 2007).

  
Prostaglandins also inhibit local cell division (observed in the cornea,
Staatz and Van Horn, 1980), shifting responsibility for tissue repair to
mobile cells, for example stem cells from the blood. PUFA also interfere with
the turnover of collagen by inhibiting proteolytic enzymes that are necessary
for tissue remodeling. These are among the changes that characterize scar
formation, rather than the scarless regeneration that can occur in the fetus.
They also occur throughout the body with aging, as part of a progressive
fibrosis.

  
Besides minimizing dietary PUFA, other things are known that will reduce the
fibrosis associated with injury, inflammation, or aging. Thyroid hormone,
progesterone, and carbon dioxide all reduce inflammation while facilitating
normal tissue remodeling. Fibrosis of the heart and liver, which are often
considered to be unavoidably progressive, can be regressed by thyroid hormone,
and various fibroses, including breast, liver, and mesentery, have been
regressed by progesterone treatment.

  
The thyroid hormone is necessary for liver regeneration, and the ability of
the thyroid gland itself to regenerate might be related to the also great
ability of the adrenal cortex to regenerate--the cells of these endocrine
glands are frequently stimulated, even by intrinsic factors such as T3 in the
thyroid, and seem to have an intrinsic stem-cell-like quality, turning-over
frequently. Secretion of stimulating substances is probably one of the
functions of macrophages in these glands (Ozbek & Ozbek, 2006) The failure to
recognize the glands regenerative ability leads to many inappropriate medical
treatments.

  
The amount of disorganized fibrous material formed in injured tissue is
variable, and it depends on the state of the individual, and on the particular
situation of the tissue. For example, the membranes lining the mouth, and the
bones and bone marrow, and the thymus gland are able to regenerate without
scarring. What they have in common with each other is a relatively high ratio
of carbon dioxide to oxygen. Salamanders, which are able to regenerate legs,
jaw, spinal cord, retina and parts of the brain (Winklemann & Winklemann,
1970), spend most of their time under cover in burrows, which besides
preventing drying of their moist skin, keeps the ratio of carbon dioxide to
oxygen fairly high.

  
The regeneration of finger tips, including a well-formed nail if some of the
base remained, will occur if the wounded end of the finger is kept enclosed,
for example by putting a metal or plastic tube over the finger. The humidity
keeps the wound from forming a dry scab, and the cells near the surface will
consume oxygen and produce carbon dioxide, keeping the ratio of carbon dioxide
to oxygen much higher than in normal uninjured tissue.

  
Carbon dioxide is being used increasingly to prevent inflammation and edema.
For example, it can be used to prevent adhesions during abdominal surgery, and
to protect the lungs during mechanical ventilation. It inhibits the formation
of inflammatory cytokines and prostaglandins (Peltekova, et al., 2010, Peng,
et al., 2009, Persson & van den Linden, 2009), and reduces the leakiness of
the intestine (Morisaki, et al., 2009). Some experiments show that as it
decreases the production of some inflammatory materials by macrophages (TNF:
Lang, et al., 2005), including lactate, it causes macrophages to activate
phagocytic neutrophils, and to increase their number and activity (Billert, et
al., 2003, Baev & Kuprava, 1997).

  
Factors that are associated with a decreased level of carbon dioxide, such as
excess estrogen and lactate, promote fibrosis. Adaptation to living at high
altitude, which is protective against degenerative disease, involves reduced
lactate formation, and increased carbon dioxide. It has been suggested that
keloid formation (over-growth of scar tissue) is less frequent at high
altitudes (Ranganathan, 1961), though this hasnt been carefully studied.
Putting an injured arm or leg into a bag of pure carbon dioxide reduces pain
and accelerates healing.

  
In aging, the removal of inactive cells becomes incomplete (Aprahamian, et
al., 2008). It is this removal of cellular debris that is essential for
regenerative healing to take place. Degenerating tissue stimulates the
formation of new tissue, but this requires adequate cellular energy for
phagocytosis, which requires proper thyroid function. Hyperthyroidism has
been shown to accelerate the process (Lewin-Kowalik, et al., 2002). The active
thyroid hormone, T3, stimulates the removal of inactive cells (Kurata, et al.,
1980).

  
Regenerative healing also requires freedom from substances that inhibit the
digestion of the debris. The great decline in proteolytic autophagy that
occurs with aging (Del Roso, et al., 2003) can be reduced by inhibiting the
release of fatty acids. This effect is additive to the antiaging effects of
calorie restriction, suggesting that it is largely the decrease of dietary
fats that makes calorie restriction effective (Donati, et al., 2004, 2008).

  
Niacinamide is a nutrient that inhibits the release of fatty acids, and it
also activates phagocytic activity and lowers phosphate. It protects against
the development of scars in spinal cord injuries, facilitates recovery from
traumatic brain injury, and accelerates healing generally. While it generally
supports immunity, its protective against autoimmunity. It can cause tumor
cells to either mature or disintegrate, but it prolongs the replicative life
of cultured cells, and protects against excitotoxicity.

  
The amounts needed seem large if niacinamide is thought of as vitamin B3,
but it should be considered as a factor that compensates for our
unphysiological exposure to inappropriate fats. Aspirin and vitamin E are
other natural substances that are therapeutic in unnaturally large amounts
because of our continual exposure to the highly unsaturated plant-derived n-3
and n-6 fats.

  
When animals are made deficient in the polyunsaturated fatty acids, their
wounds heal, with normal or accelerated collagen synthesis, and with more
vigorous collagen breakdown (Parnham, et al., 1977). Their blood vessels are
more resistant, preventing shock that would otherwise be caused by many
factors. All phases of development, from gestation to aging, are altered by
the presence of the unsaturated fats, and these effects correspond closely to
the loss of the regenerative capacity, the ability to replenish and restore
tissues.

  
If the very small amounts of polyunsaturated fats reaching the fetus can
retard growth and brain development (Liu and Borgman, 1977; Borgman, et al.,
1975) and function, it is apparently acting on some very important biological
processes. The toxic effects of PUFA seen in the animal studies probably have
their equivalent in humans, for example the association of childhood
hyperactivity with a smaller brain. The incidence of the attention deficit-
hyperactivity disorder is increasing in the US, somewhat faster among girls
than boys (Robison, et al.,2002). In schizophrenic teenagers, the brain
shrinks, suggesting an interaction of the hormones of puberty with
environmental toxins or deficiencies. The progressive accumulation of much
larger amounts of these fats later in life, especially after the rate of
growth decreases, could be expected to cause even greater interference with
those processes of development and function.  
All tissues age, but the brain might be the least ambiguous organ to consider.
The aging brain often shrinks, and becomes more susceptible to excitotoxicity,
which kills brain cells. Degenerative brain diseases, such as Huntingtons
chorea and Creutzfeld-Jacob disease, have been compared to the dementia of
pellagra, in which chorea and other excitatory processes are obvious. (Anti-
glutamatergic drugs are beginning to be used therapeutically, to restore some
inhibitory balance in the degenerating brain.)

  
Pellagra occurs about twice as often in women as in men, and this is because
estrogen activates an enzyme that alters metabolism of tryptophan, blocking
the formation of niacin. The alternative products include the excitotoxin,
quinolinic acid, and some carcinogens.

Progesterone inhibits the activity of that enzyme. Progesterone also lowers
brain serotonin (Izquierdo, et al., 1978), decreases the excitatory
carcinogens (Moursi, et al., 1970) and increases the formation of niacin
(Shibata, et al., 2003) The polyunsaturated fats, DHA, EPA, and linoleic acid
activate the conversion of tryptophan to quinolinic acid (Egashira, et al.,
2003, 2004), and inhibit the formation of niacin (Egashira, et al., 1995).

**  
**The normal pathway from tryptophan to niacin leads to formation of the
coenzyme NAD, which is involved in a great variety of cellular processes,
notably energy production, the maintenance of the cellular differentiated
state by regulating gene expression, and the activity of phagocytes.  
Glucose and niacinamide work very closely with each other, and with the
thyroid hormone, in the maintenance and repair of cells and tissues. When one
of these energy-producing factors is lacking, the changes in cell functions --
a sort of pre-inflammatory state -- activate corrective processes. Energy
depletion itself is an excitatory state, that calls for increased fuel and
oxygen. But when cells are exposed to PUFA, their ability to use glucose is
blocked, increasing their exposure to the fats. Saturated fats activate the
pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme that is essential for the efficient use of
glucose, while PUFA block it. (The MRL mouse strain has a high regenerative
ability, associated with a retained tendency to metabolize glucose rather than
fatty acids.) The negative energetic effects of PUFA include interfering with
thyroid and progesterone. The energy resources are suppressed, at the same
time that the inflammatory signals are amplified, and many regulatory pathways
(including the replenishment of NAD from tryptophan) are diverted.

  
In the fetus, especially before the fats from the mothers diet begin to
accumulate, signals from injured tissue produce the changes that lead quickly
to repair of the damage, but during subsequent life, similar signals produce
incomplete repairs, and as they are ineffective they tend to be intensified
and repeated, and eventually the faulty repair processes become the main
problem. Although this is an ecological problem, it is possible to decrease
the damage by avoiding the polyunsaturated fats and the many toxins that
synergize with them, while increasing glucose, niacinamide, carbon dioxide,
and other factors that support high energy metabolism, including adequate
exposure to long wavelength light and avoidance of harmful radiation. As long
as the toxic factors are present, increased amounts of protective factors such
as progesterone, thyroid, sugar, niacinamide, and carbon dioxide can be used
therapeutically and preventively.  
  
REFERENCES  
  
Eur J Med Res. 2003 Aug 20;8(8):381-7. **Dietary fatty acids and immune
reactions in synovial tissue.** Adam O.  
Early Hum Dev. 1990 Dec;24(3):239-48. **Biochemical EFA status of mothers and
their neonates after normal pregnancy.** Al MD, Hornstra G, van der Schouw YT,
Bulstra-Ramakers MT, Huisjes HJ.  
Clin Exp Immunol. 2008 Jun;152(3):448-55. Epub 2008 Apr 16. **Ageing is
associated with diminished apoptotic cell clearance in vivo.** Aprahamian T,
Takemura Y, Goukassian D, Walsh K.  
Aviakosm Ekolog Med. 1997;31(6):56-9. **[Functional activity of peripheral
blood neutrophils of rats during combined effects of hypoxia, hypercapnia and
cooling]** [Article in Russian] Baev VI, Kuprava MV.  
Br J Nutr. 1984 Mar;51(2):219-24. **Inhibition of tryptophan metabolism by
oestrogens in the rat: a factor in the aetiology of pellagra.** Bender DA,
Totoe L.  
Vascul Pharmacol. 2003 Feb;40(2):119-25. **Oxidative metabolism of peripheral
blood neutrophils in experimental acute hypercapnia in the mechanically
ventilated rabbit.** Billert H, Drobnik L, Podstawska D, Wlodarczyk M, Kurpisz
M.  
Am J Vet Res. 1975 Jun;36(6):799-805. **Influence of maternal dietary fat upon
rat pups.** Borgman RF, Bursey RG, Caffrey BC.  
Med Hypotheses. 2000 Oct;55(4):337-47. **Dominant role of monocytes in control
of tissue function and aging.** Bukovsky A, Caudle MR, Keenan JA.  
Exp Gerontol. 2003 May;38(5):519-27. **Ageing- related changes in the in vivo
function of rat liver macroautophagy and proteolysis. **Del Roso A, Vittorini
S, Cavallini G, Donati A, Gori Z, Masini M, Pollera M, Bergamini E.  
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2009 Apr;80(4):207-12. **Fetal
learning and memory: weak associations with the early essential
polyunsaturated fatty acid status.** Dirix CE, Hornstra G, Nijhuis JG.  
Early Hum Dev. 2009 Aug;85(8):525-30. **Associations between term birth
dimensions and prenatal exposure to essential and trans fatty acids.** Dirix
CE, Kester AD, Hornstra G.  
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Feb 15;366(3):786-92. Epub 2007 Dec 17. **In
vivo effect of an antilipolytic drug (3,5'-dimethylpyrazole) on autophagic
proteolysis and autophagy-related gene expression in rat liver.** Donati A,
Ventruti A, Cavallini G, Masini M, Vittorini S, Chantret I, Codogno P,
Bergamini E.  
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Nov 8;1686(1-2):118-24. **Differenti al effects of
dietary fatty acids on rat liver alpha-amino-beta-carboxymuconate-epsilon-
semialdehyde decarboxylase activity and gene expression.** Egashira Y,
Murotani G, Tanabe A, Saito K, Uehara K, Morise A, Sato M, Sanada H. Hepatic
alpha-amino-beta-carboxymuconate-epsilon-semialdehyde decarboxylase (ACMSD;
formerly termed picolinic carboxylase) [EC4.1.1.45] plays a key role in
regulating NAD biosynthesis and the generation of quinolinate (quinolinic
acid) from tryptophan. Quinolinate is a potent endogenous excitotoxin of
neuronal cells. We previously reported that ingestion of fatty acids by rats
leads to a decrease in their hepatic ACMSD activity. However, the mechanism of
this phenomenon is not clarified. We previously purified ACMSD and cloned cDNA
encoding rat ACMSD. Therefore, in this study, we examined the differential
effect of fatty acids on ACMSD mRNA expression by Northern blot. Moreover, we
measured quinolinic acid concentration in rats fed on fatty acid. When diets
containing 2% level of fatty acid were given to male Sprague-Dawley rats (4
weeks old) for 8 days, long-chain saturated fatty acids and oleic acid did not
affect ACMSD mRNA expression in the liver. Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) strongly suppressed the liver ACMSD mRNA
expression. In **rats fed with high linoleic acid diet for 8 days, serum
quinolinic acid was significantly increased as compared with the rats fed on a
fatty acid-free diet under the condition of the approximately same calorie
ingestion.** These results suggest that the transcription level of ACMSD is
modulated by polyunsaturated fatty acids, and suppressive potency of ACMSD
mRNA is n-3 fatty acid family>linoleic acid (n-6 fatty acid)>saturated fatty
acid. Moreover, this study provides the information that a high
polyunsaturated fatty acid diet affects the production of quinolinic acid in
serum by suppressing the ACMSD activity.  
Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 2007 Mar;77(2):142-8. **Dietary protein level and
dietary interaction affect quinolinic acid concentration in rats.** Egashira
Y, Sato M, Saito K, Sanada H. In this study, we examined whether dietary
protein level, fatty acid type, namely saturated fatty acid and
polyunsaturated fatty acid, and their interaction affect serum quinolinic acid
concentration in rats. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (4-weeks old) were fed with
20% casein + 10% stearic acid diet (20C10S), 20% casein + 10% linoleic acid
diet (20C10L), 40% casein + 10% stearic acid diet (40C10S), or **40% casein +
10% linoleic acid diet (40C10L)** for 8 days, and serum quinolinic acid
concentration and ACMSD activity were determined. Serum quinolinic acid
**concentration was significantly increased in the 40C10L** group compared
with other three groups. There was also the negative correlation between the
sum of liver and kidney ACMSD activities, and serum quinolinic acid
concentration per tryptophan intake (r = 0.8209, p < 0.01). **Increased serum
QA concentrations are probably due to a decreased ACMSD activity.  
** Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Nov 8;1686(1-2):118-24. **Differenti al effects
of dietary fatty acids on rat liver alpha-amino-beta-carboxymuconate-epsilon-
semialdehyde decarboxylase activity and gene expression.** Egashira Y,
Murotani G, Tanabe A, Saito K, Uehara K, Morise A, Sato M, Sanada H.  
Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 2007 Mar;77(2):142-8. **Dietary protein level and
dietary interaction affect quinolinic acid concentration in rats.** Egashira
Y, Sato M, Saito K, Sanada H.  
Comp Biochem Physiol A Physiol. 1995 Aug;111(4):539-45. **Effect of dietary
linoleic acid on the tryptophan-niacin metabolism in streptozotocin diabetic
rats.** Egashira Y, Nakazawa A, Ohta T, Shibata K, Sanada H.  
Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;527:671-4. **Dietary linoleic acid suppresses gene
expression of rat liver alpha-amino-beta- carboxymuconate-epsilon-semialdehyde
decarboxylase (ACMSD) and increases quinolinic acid in serum.** Egashira Y,
Sato M, Tanabe A, Saito K, Fujigaki S, Sanada H.  
J Clin Invest. 1994 Mar;93(3):1063-70. **Neutrophil migration inhibitory
properties of polyunsaturated fatty acids. The role of fatty acid structure,
metabolism, and possible second messenger systems.** Ferrante A, Goh D, Harvey
DP, Robinson BS, Hii CS, Bates EJ, Hardy SJ, Johnson DW, Poulos A.  
Clin Invest Med. 2008;31(3):E106-16. **Hyaluronan oligosaccharides are
potential stimulators to angiogenesis via RHAMM mediated signal pathway in
wound healing.** Gao F, Yang CX, Mo W, Liu YW, He YQ.  
Pharmacol Res Commun. 1978 Jul;10(7):643-56. **Role of ACTH on the effect of
medroxyprogesterone in brain stem serotonin.** Izquierdo JA, Savini C, Borghi
E, Rabiller G, Costas S, Justel E.  
Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2007 Nov 19;61:683-9. **[Hyaluronan- mediated
regulation of inflammation] **[Article in Polish] Krasinski R, Tchórzewski H.  
J Pediatr Surg. 1987 Jul;22(7):640-4. Fetal response to injury in the rabbit.
Krummel TM, Nelson JM, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ, Salzberg AM, Greenfield LJ,
Cohen IK.  
Acta Haematol. 1980;63(4):185-90. **Thrombocyto penia in Graves' disease:
effect of T3 on platelet kinetics. **Kurata Y, Nishioeda Y, Tsubakio T, Kitani
T.  
Clin Chim Acta. 1977 Sep 1;79(2):479-87. **Influence of glucose and inhibitors
of glycolysis on release of total proteins and enzymes from human
leukocytes.** Lahrichi M, Tarallo P, Houpert Y, Siest G.  
Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 Jul;289(1):L96-L103. Epub 2005 Mar
18. **Effect of CO2 on LPS-induced cytokine responses in rat alveolar
macrophages.** Lang CJ, Dong P, Hosszu EK, Doyle IR.  
J Pediatr Surg. 1999 May;34(5):695-700. **TGF-beta1 alters the healing of
cutaneous fetal excisional wounds.** Lanning DA, Nwomeh BC, Montante SJ, Yager
DR, Diegelmann RF, Haynes JH.  
Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2002;20(5):181-7. **Experimental hyperthyroidism
increases the effectiveness of predegenerated peripheral nerve graft
implantation into hippocampus of adult rats.** Lewin-Kowalik J, Golka B,
Larysz-Brysz M, Swiech-Sabuda E, Granek A.  
Am J Vet Res. 1977 Oct;38(10):1657-9. **Influence in rats of dietary fats
during the perinatal period: effects upon development and behavior of dams and
offspring.** Liu YL, Borgman RF.  
Intensive Care Med. 2009 Jan;35(1):129-35. **Hypercapnic acidosis minimizes
endotoxin-induced gut mucosal injury in rabbits.** Morisaki H, Yajima S,
Watanabe Y, Suzuki T, Yamamoto M, Katori N, Hashiguchi S, Takeda J.  
Int J Tissue React. 1993;15(4):151-6. **Effects of prostaglandins and
indomethacin on the cellular inflammatory response following surgical trauma
in fetal rabbits.** Morykwas MJ, Perry SL, Argenta LC.  
Bull World Health Organ. 1970;43(5):651-61. **The influence of sex, age,
synthetic oestrogens, progestogens and oral contraceptives on the excretion of
urinary tryptophan metabolites.** Moursi GE, Abdel-Daim MH, Kelada NL, Abdel-
Tawab GA, Girgis LH.  
Int J Dev Neurosci. 2007 Dec;25(8):499-508. **Signal transduction pathways
associated with ATP-induced proliferation of cell progenitors in the intact
embryonic retina.** Nunes PH, Calaza Kda C, Albuquerque LM, Fragel-Madeira L,
Sholl-Franco A, Ventura AL.  
Mikrobiyol Bul. 2006 Oct;40(4):325-32. **[Histologic demonstration of adrenal
macrophages as a member of mononuclear phagocytic system in guinea pig
models]** [Article in Turkish] Ozbek A, Ozbek E.  
Prostaglandins. 1977 Oct;14(4):709-14. **Increased collagen metabolism in
granulomata induced in rats deficient in endogenous prostaglandin
precursors.** Parnham MJ, Shoshan S, Bonta IL, Neiman-Wollner S.  
Intensive Care Med. 2010 May;36(5):869-78. Epub 2010 Mar 6. **Hypercapnic
acidosis in ventilator-induced lung injury.** Peltekova V, Engelberts D,
Otulakowski G, Uematsu S, Post M, Kavanagh BP.  
J Surg Res. 2009 Jan;151(1):40-7. Epub 2008 Apr 23. **Heated and humidified
CO2 prevents hypothermia, peritoneal injury, and intra-abdominal adhesions
during prolonged laparoscopic insufflations.** Peng Y, Zheng M, Ye Q, Chen X,
Yu B, Liu B.  
Med Hypotheses. 2009 Oct;73(4):521-3. Epub 2009 Jul 8. **Intraoperative field
flooding with warm humidified CO2 may help to prevent adhesion formation after
open surgery.** Persson M, van der Linden J.  
British Medical Journal 1961 Feb. 4, 1:364. **Keloids after B.C.G.**
Ranganathan KS.  
CNS Drugs. 2002;16(2):129-37. **Is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
increasing among girls in the US? Trends in diagnosis and the prescribing of
stimulants.** Robison LM, Skaer TL, Sclar DA, Galin RS.  
Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;527:435-41. **Increase in conversion of tryptophan to
niacin in pregnant rats.** Shibata K, Fukuwatari T, Murakami M, Sasaki R.  
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1980 Aug;19(8):983-6. **The effects of aging and
inflammation on corneal endothelial wound healing in rabbits.** Staatz WD, Van
Horn DL.  
Pediatr Surg Int. 2001 May;17(4):254-8. ** Polyunsaturated fatty acids
influence neonatal monocyte survival. **Sweeney B, Puri P, Reen DJ. PUFAs
modulate apoptosis of certain tumour cells and cell lines. Monocytes, which
are major effector cells of the innate immune system, play a central role in
the initiation, development, and outcome of the immune response. They are
crucial in the defence against invading pathogens and are involved in the
lysis of infected or malignant cells, wound healing, **** repair, and
remodeling of tissues. In the present study we investigated whether PUFAs
might evoke apoptosis in newborn monocytes. In the absence of fatty acids,
30 +/- 4% of control cord monocytes underwent apoptosis or necrosis after 24 h
incubation. At a concentration of 50 microM, none of the PUFAs had a
significant effect on monocyte cell death, **but at a dose of 100 microM, DHA
resulted in 60 +/- 4% cell death (P < 0.05) while the other PUFAs had no
significant effect. In contrast, at higher concentrations (200 microM), all
the PUFAs significantly increased monocyte cell death (AA: 70 +/- 5%, DHA: 86
**+/- 2%, EPA: 70 +/- 4%). PUFAs thus exert a potent influence on cord
monocyte cell survival in vitro. Their effect is dose-dependent and DHA
appears to be the most potent of the fatty acids tested. The influence of
PUFAs on neonatal monocyte-cell survival suggests a novel mechanism whereby
PUFAs may modulate the immune response.  
J Cell Mol Med. 2007 Nov-Dec;11(6):1342-51. **Differe ntial cytokine activity
and morphology during wound healing in the neonatal and adult rat skin.
**Wagner W, Wehrmann M.  
Pharmacol Res Commun. 1978 Jul;10(7):643-56. **Role of ACTH on the effect of
medroxyprogesterone in brain stem serotonin.** Izquierdo JA, Savini C, Borghi
E, Rabiller G, Costas S, Justel E.  
J Cell Mol Med. 2007 Nov-Dec;11(6):1342-51. **Differe ntial cytokine activity
and morphology during wound healing in the neonatal and adult rat skin.
**Wagner W, Wehrmann M.  
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2002 Jun;109(7):2355-62. **The fetal cleft palate: III.
Ultrastructural and functional analysis of palatal development following in
utero repair of the congenital model.** Weinzweig J, Panter KE, Spangenberger
A, Harper JS, McRae R, Edstrom LE.  
Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch 1970 Jan. 82(2): 149-71. **[Experimental studies on the
regeneration of the telencephalon of Ambystoma mexicanum after the resection
of both hemispheres]** E Winkelmann, A Winkelmann.  
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Mar;298(3):C457-64. **Shockwaves increase
T-cell proliferation and IL-2 expression through ATP release, P2X7 receptors,
and FAK activation.** Yu T, Junger WG, Yuan C, Jin A, Zhao Y, Zheng X, Zeng Y,
Liu J.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2012. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

