![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Serotonin, depression, and aggression** : **The problem of brain energy**

Extremely serious mistakes about the nature of the solar system didn't matter
too much until interplanetary travel became a possibility. Extremely serious
mistakes about brain "transmitters" and "receptors" didn't matter too much
until the drug industry got involved.

* * *

"Three years before Prozac received approval by the US Food and Drug
Administration in late 1987, the German BGA, that country's FDA equivalent,
had such serious reservations about Prozac's safety that it refused to approve
the antidepressant based on Lilly's studies showing that previously
nonsuicidal patients who took the drug had a fivefold higher rate of suicides
and suicide attempts than those on older antidepressants, and a threefold
higher rate than those taking placebos."

"Using figures on Prozac both from Lilly and independent research, however,
Dr. David Healy, an expert on the brain's serotonin system and director of the
North Wales Department of Psychological Medicine at the University of Wales,
estimated that "probably 50,000 people have committed suicide on Prozac since
its launch, over and above the number who would have done so if left
untreated."

The Boston Globe, 2000.

* * *

Anyone who has been reading the mass media and watching television in recent
decades is familiar with the use of tryptophan as an antidepressant.
Tryptophan is easily converted to serotonin and melatonin in the body. The
most popular kind of antidepressant, the serotonin reuptake inhibitor, is
said to act by increasing the action of serotonin in the brain. Many people
have read articles in popular science magazines explaining that a deficiency
of serotonin can cause depression, suicide, and aggression. Estrogen is often
said to achieve its wonderful effects by increasing the effects of
serotonin.

Reserpine is an ancient tranquilizer, derived from a plant used in India for
centuries. It has a powerful tranquilizing action, has been used to treat
hypertension, and was found to be an antidepressant (Davies and Shepherd,
1955). It lowers the concentration of serotonin in the brain and other
tissues. Isoniazid, an antidepressant that came into use in the 1950s, is
effective, but it probably has no effect on serotonin. When those drugs were
popular, serotonin wasnt recognized as a neurotransmitter. It wasnt until
the 1960s that our present set of doctrines regarding serotonins effects on
mood and behavior came into being.

Serotonin research is relatively new, but it rivals estrogen research for the
level of incompetence and apparent fraudulent intent that can be found in
professional publications.

This is partly because of the involvement of the drug industry, but the U.S.
government also played a role in setting a pattern of confused and perverse
interpretation of serotonin physiology, by its policy of denigrating and
incriminating LSD, a powerful serotonin (approximate) antagonist, by any means
possible, for example claiming that it causes genetic damage and provokes
homicidal or suicidal violence. The issue of genetic damage was already
disproved in the 1960s, but this was never publicly acknowledged by the
National Institutes of Mental Health or other government agency. The
governments irresponsible actions helped to create the drug culture, in which
health warnings about drugs were widely disregarded, because the government
had been caught in blatant fraud. In more recent years, government warnings
about tryptophan supplements have been widely dismissed, because the
government has so often lied. Even when the public health agencies try to do
something right, they fail, because they have done so much wrong.

In animal studies LSD, and other anti-serotonin agents, increase playfulness
and accelerate learning, and cause behavioral impairment only at very high
doses. While reserpine was used medically for several decades, and was
eventually found to have harmful side effects, medical research in LSD was
stopped before its actual side effects could be discovered. The
misrepresentations about LSD, as a powerful antiserotonin agent, allowed a set
of cultural stereotypes about serotonin to be established. Misconceptions
about serotonin and melatonin and tryptophan, which are metabolically
interrelated, have persisted, and it seems that the drug industry has
exploited these mistakes to promote the new generation of psychoactive drugs
as activators of serotonin responses. If LSD makes people go berserk, as the
government claimed, then a product to amplify the effects of serotonin should
make people sane.

The serotonin reuptake inhibitors are called the third generation of
antidepressants. The monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, that came into use in
the 1950s, are called the first generation. When their patents expire on a
generation of drugs, the drug companies find reasons for claiming that the
new drugs are better. Every doctor in the country seems to know that the old
MAO-inhibitors are dangerous because they can raise blood pressure if you eat
certain kinds of cheese while taking them. **In fact, statistics show that
they are safer than the new generation of antidepressants.** It is hardly
possible for a physician to prescribe the most appropriate drug, because the
medical licensing boards are thoroughly indoctrinated by the drug companies,
to believe that the safest and most effective drugs are those whose patents
are still in force.

While it is true that the newer antidepressants increase the actions of
serotonin, it is not true that this explains their antidepressant action. This
is a culturally conditioned promotional construction. Since different
antidepressants increase, decrease, or dont affect the actions of serotonin,
a radically new kind of theory of depression and the antidepressants is
needed. Theories based on transmitter substances and receptors are favored
by the drug industry, but that kind of thinking is hardly better than the
belief in demons and their exorcism. If an herbal tea cures depression because
the demon doesnt like its smell, at least the patient never has to abandon a
remedy because a tea patent has expired.

In the world of neurotransmitters and receptors, there is ample room for
the development of speculative mechanisms of drug action. Serotonin is
regulated by the rate of its synthesis and degradation, by its uptake,
storage, and release, and by its transporters, and its effects are modified by
a great variety of receptors, by the number of these receptors, and by their
binding affinities and competitive binders. Different receptors are defined
by the effects of chemicals other than serotonin; this means that serotonin
itself hypothetically gains some of the properties of every substance that
shows some binding competition with serotonin. This complexity*note 1 has made
it possible to argue that a given condition is caused by either an excess or a
deficiency of serotonin.

The drug companies like to call some of their new products SSRI, selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, meaning that they dont indiscriminately
increase all the biogenic amines, the way the old MAO inhibitors supposedly
did. Every drug does many things, each a little differently, so its
technically true to say that they selectively do this or that. But the term
antidepressant, as distinguished from tranquilizer, says that the drug is
intended to relieve depression. Injecting serotonin never does that, but
sometimes adrenalin or dopamine does, and these SSRI drugs increase the
activities of those other amines enough that those changes could explain the
altered mood, if it werent for the need to speak of a new generation of
drugs. Injecting serotonin, or increasing its activity, can cause sedation,
helplessness, or apathy, but these drugs have that effect only some of the
time. Therefore, they arent called tranquilizers. If they were really
selective for serotonin, they just wouldnt be antidepressants. And chemicals
that antagonize serotonin do seem to function as antidepressants (Martin, et
al., 1992). When an SSRI is used to treat irritability and aggression, it is
appropriate to call it a tranquilizer. When drugs are used empirically,
without really understanding the disease or the drug, classifications,
descriptions, and names are subjective. The serotonin situation reminds me of
the history of DES: For almost twenty years, this synthetic estrogen was
marketed for the prevention of abortions; then it came out as the morning
after contraception/abortion pill. If increasing serotonin isnt the cure,
then maybe decreasing serotonin will be the cure.

To begin to understand serotonin, its necessary to step back from the culture
of neurotransmitters, and to look at the larger biological picture.

Serotonin and estrogen have many systematically interrelated functions, and
women are much more likely to suffer from depression than men are. Serotonin
and histamine are increased by estrogen, and their activation mimics the
effects of estrogen. Serotonin is closely involved in mood disorders, but also
in a great variety of other problems that affect women much more frequently
than men. These are probably primarily energy disorders, relating to cellular
respiration and thyroid function. Liver disease and brain disease, e.g.,
Alzheimers disease, are both much more common in women than in men, and
serotonin and estrogen strongly affect the energetic processes in these
organs. Liver disease can increase the brains exposure to serotonin, ammonia,
and histamine. It isnt just a coincidence that these three amines occur
together and are neurotoxic; they are all stress-related substances, with
natural roles in signaling and regulation.

There are good reasons for thinking that serotonin contributes to the nerve
damage seen in multiple sclerosis and Alzheimers disease.

The high incidence of multiple sclerosis in women, and its onset during their
reproductive years, is well known. The number of brain lesions is associated
with the ratio of estrogen to progesterone. Estrogen activates mast cells to
release histamine and serotonin, and activated mast cells can produce brain
edema and demyelination. Blood clots have been microscopically associated with
brain lesions like those in multiple sclerosis, and the platelets in clots
release neurotoxic serotonin.

In Parkinsons disease, the benefits seen from increasing the concentration of
dopamine could result from dopamines antagonism to serotonin; anti-serotonin
drugs can alleviate the symptoms, and 5-hydroxytryptophan can worsen the
symptoms (Chase, et al., 1976). Other movement disorders, including akathisia
and chorea, can be produced by serotonin. In autism, repetitive motions are a
common symptom, and serotonin is high in the blood serum and platelets of
autistic children and their relatives. Irritable bowel syndrome, another kind
of movement disorder, can be treated effectively with anti-serotonin agents.
This syndrome is very common in women, with premenstrual exacerbations, when
estrogen is highest. One of the side effects of oral contraceptives is chorea,
uncontrollable dancing movements. Some research has found increased serotonin
in people with Huntingtons chorea (Kish, et al., 1987), and positive results
with bromocriptine have been reported (Agnoli, et al., 1977).

The neurosteroid, allopregnanolone, for which progesterone is the precursor,
facilitates the inhibitory action of GABA, which is known to be deficient in
some disorders of mood and movement. This suggests that progesterone will be
therapeutic in the movement disorders, as it is in various mood problems.
Progesterone has some specific antiserotonin actions (e.g., Wu, et al., 2000).

The serotonin reuptake inhibitors are presumed to have the same effect on
the brain that they have on blood platelets. They inhibit the ability of
platelets to retain and concentrate serotonin, allowing it to stay in the
plasma. This uptake-inhibited condition is a model of the platelet behavior
seen in multiple sclerosis and Alzheimers disease.

Serotonin and its derivative, melatonin, are both involved in the biology of
torpor and hibernation. Serotonin inhibits mitochondrial respiration.
Excitoxic death of nerve cells involves both the limitation of energy
production, and increased cellular activation. Serotonin has both of these
actions.

In hibernating animals, the stress of a declining food supply causes increased
serotonin production. In humans and animals that dont hibernate, the stress
of winter causes very similar changes. Serotonin lowers temperature by
decreasing the metabolic rate. Tryptophan and melatonin are also hypothermic.
In the winter, more thyroid is needed to maintain a normal rate of metabolism.

Increased serotonin interferes with the consolidation of learning. Hypothermia
has a similar effect. Since estrogen increases serotonergia, and decreases
body temperature, these effects help to explain the long-observed interference
of estrogen with learning.

Although ammonia, produced by fatigue or liver inefficiency, creates torpor,
it can also cause convulsions. It synergizes with serotonin, and both of these
promote excitotoxicity.

Serotonins other names include thrombotonin, thrombocytin, enteramine, and
5-HT, its chemical name (5-hydroxytryptamine). These historical names derive
from its role in the intestine and in blood vessels. In 1951, it was
discovered that enteramine and thrombotonin were a single substance, and its
involvement in circulatory disease, especially hypertension and vascular
spasms, was the focus of research. (The increase in the number of
cardiovascular events recently seen in the study of women using estrogen is
what might be expected from something which increases serotonin dominance.) It
causes vasoconstriction and vasospasm, and promotes clotting, when its
released from platelets. Especially when it is released from mast cells, it is
considered to be an inflammatory mediator, along with histamine. Edema,
bronchoconstriction, immunosuppression, and joint swelling are produced by the
release of serotonin from platelets or other cells. As inflammatory mediators,
serotonin and histamine are directly involved in asthma, hives,
gastrointestinal damage from alcohol, nerve cell damage, edema, and shock.

The broadly protective effects of antihistamine drugs have been energetically
exploited by the drug industry for fifty years. Why havent antiserotonin
drugs been similarly emphasized?

Research on LSD and its derivatives led to drugs such as bromocriptine, which
oppose the effects of histamine and estrogen. Some of bromocriptines effects
are clearly antagonistic to serotonin, though bromocriptine is usually called
a dopamine agonist; dopamine is pretty generally a serotonin antagonist.
Methysergide, a related drug with antiserotonin activity, is effective in
protecting the brain from the effects of strokes. But there is a general
disinclination to understand the broad biological meaning of these effects.

I think the corrupt campaign against LSD played a large role in this: If the
therapeutic value of LSD and related drugs (e.g., methysergide) with expired
patents,*note2 used as antiserotonin agents, became widely known, the existing
system of power and profit would be threatened. The war on drugs has always
had its ulterior motives,including justifying domestic and foreign
interventions in issues that have nothing to do with drugs. And in the case of
the serotonin/antiserotonin mythology, this war has been rewarding to the
drug industry--Lilly makes over $2 billion annually on Prozac. Each suicide
caused by Prozac would appear to be balanced by several hundred thousand
dollars earned by the corporation. If the war on drugs were serious, this
would be a good place to start. And in weighing what corporate punishments
might be appropriate, this corporations financial support for universal
capital punishment should be taken into account. Many experiments have shown
that estrogen is very important for aggressive behavior in animals, and
estrogen promotes serotonins actions. Some research shows that increased
serotonin is associated with certain types of increased aggressiveness, and
antiserotonin agents decrease aggresiveness (Ieni, et al., 1985; McMillen, et
al., 1987) but the clearest research has to do with the crucial role of
serotonin in learned helplessness. Learned helplessness is a biological
condition that is created by inescapable stress. In this state, animals that
would normally swim for hours will stop swimming after a few minutes and allow
themselves to drown. They simply dont have enough mental or physical energy
to overcome challenges.

In learned helplessness, the level of serotonin is high, and an excess of
serotonin helps to create the state of learned helplessness.

Serotonin activates glycolysis, forming lactic acid. Excess lactic acid tends
to decrease efficient energy production by interfering with mitochondrial
respiration.

Heart failure, hypertension, muscle hyperalgesia (Babenko, et al., 2000), some
panic reactions, and other maladaptive biological events associated with
problems of energy metabolism, are promoted by excessive serotonin.

Autistic children and their relatives have high concentrations of serotonin in
their serum and platelets. Members of a family tend to eat the same foods and
to share other environmental conditions. Prenatal hypothyroidism and various
kinds of imprinting, including hyperestrogenism, could account for this. Some
studies have reported that thyroid supplements help autistic children, and
anti-serotonin drugs have caused improvement in both children and adults.

Serotonin tends to cause hypoglycemia, and hypoglycemia inhibits the
conversion of thyroxine into the active T3 hormone. Hypoglycemia and
hypothyroidism increase noradrenaline, and autistic people have been found to
have more noradrenaline than normal. These changes, along with the general
hypometabolism caused by excess serotonin, seem to justify the use of a
thyroid supplement in autism and other serotonin-excess syndromes.

Overdose with the serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or with 5-hydroxytryptophan,
which has effects similar to serotonin, can cause the sometimes fatal
"serotonin syndrome." Symptoms can include tremors, altered consciousness,
poor coordination, cardiovascular disturbances, and seizures. Treatment with
anti-serotonin drugs can alleviate the symptoms and usually can prevent death.

The serotonin syndrome has been reported in users of St. Johns wort as an
antidepressant. Since the other large neutral amino acids compete with
tryptophan for entry into cells, the branched chain amino acids have some
anti-serotonin activity, and this could be a justification for their use by
athletes, since tryptophan and serotonin decrease glycogen stores and reduce
endurance.

The only amino acid that has ever been found to be carcinogenic is tryptophan.
Its ability to mimic estrogen in promoting the release of prolactin is
probably responsible.

A large carbohydrate meal increases the ratio of tryptophan to the competing
amino acids, and it has been proposed that this can shift the bodys balance
toward increased serotonin. In an animal study, bromocriptine, which shifts
the balance away from serotonin, reduced obesity and insulin and free fatty
acids, and improved glucose tolerance.

All of these observations are easiest to understand in terms of the
suppression of cellular energy. Serotonin, like estrogen, lowers cellular ATP
and interferes with oxidative metabolism.

Serotonin, like histamine, has its proper physiological functions, but it is a
mediator of stress that has to be systematically balanced by the systems that
support high energy respiratory metabolism. The use of supplements of
tryptophan, hydroxytryptophan, or of the serotonin promoting antidepressant
drugs, seems to be biologically inappropriate.

Many of the symptoms produced by excess serotonin are also the symptoms of
hypothyroidism. Thyroid, progesterone, and high quality protein nutrition are
central to protection against the serotonin syndromes. (Progesterone, like
LSD, can inhibit the firing of serotonergic nerves, but an overdose, unlike
LSD, never produces hallucinations.)

One of the many actions of the "SSRI" (such as fluoxetine, Prozac), which
arent related to their effect on serotonin, is to increase the concentration
of allopregnanolone in the brain, imitating the action of increased
progesterone. Following this discovery, Lilly got Prozac approved as a
treatment for premenstrual syndrome. Since the production of allopregnanolone
and progesterone depends on the availability of pregnenolone and cholesterol,
a low cholesterol level would be one of the factors making this an
inappropriate way to treat PMS.

If we think biologically, starting with the role of serotonin as a damage-
induced inflammatory mediator, we can speculate that an infinite number of
irritating substances will be serotonin reuptake inhibitors. The particular
history of the third generation antidepressants is one that should disturb
our tranquility.

**SOME NOTES AND SOURCES**

*Note 1: I dont want to imply that the receptor theory is wrong just because it allows for the introduction of innumerable experimental artifacts; it is primarily wrong because it is tied to the profoundly irrelevant membrane theory of cell regulation.  
*Note 2: Preparation for Lysergic Acid Amides: United States Patent Office 2,736,728 Patented February 28, 1956 Richard P. Pioch, Indianapolis, Indiana, assignor, to Eli Lilly and Co., Indianapolis, Indiana, a corporation of Indiana. No drawing. Application December 6, 1954, Serial No. 473,443. 10 claims. (Cl. 260-285.5)  
From the PDR on Prozac **:** Pharmacodynamics: The antidepressant and
antiobsessive-compulsive action of fluoxetine is **presumed** to be linked to
its inhibition of CNS neuronal uptake of serotonin. Studies at clinically
relevant doses in man have demonstrated that fluoxetine blocks the uptake of
serotonin **into human platelets**. Studies in animals also suggest that
fluoxetine is a much more potent uptake inhibitor of serotonin than of
norepinephrine.  
The Lancet 269 (1955): 11720. **Reserpine in the Treatment of Anxious and
Depressed Patients,** Davies DL and Shepherd M.  
Gen Pharmacol 1994 Oct;25(6):1257-1262. **Serotonin-induced decrease in brain
ATP, stimulation of brain anaerobic glycolysis and elevation of plasma
hemoglobin; the protective action of calmodulin antagonists.** Koren-
Schwartzer N, Chen-Zion M, Ben-Porat H, Beitner R Department of Life Sciences,
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel. **1\. Injection of serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine) to rats, induced a dramatic fall in brain ATP level,
accompanied by an increase in P(i). Concomitant to these changes, the activity
of cytosolic phosphofructokinase, the rate-limiting enzyme of glycolysis, was
significantly enhanced. Stimulation of anaerobic glycolysis was also reflected
by a marked increase in lactate content in brain. 2. Brain glucose**
1,6-bisphosphate level was decreased, whereas fructose 2,6-bisphosphate was
unaffected by serotonin. 3. All these serotonin-induced changes in brain,
which are characteristic for cerebral ischemia, were prevented by treatment
with the calmodulin (CaM) antagonists, trifluoperazine or thioridazine. 4.
Injection of serotonin also induced a marked elevation of plasma hemoglobin,
reflecting lysed erythrocytes, which was also prevented by treatment with the
CaM antagonists. 5. The present results suggest that CaM antagonists may be
effective drugs in treatment of many pathological conditions and diseases in
which plasma serotonin levels are known to increase.  
J Neural Transm 1998;105(8-9):975-86. **Role of tryptophan in the elevated
serotonin-turnover in hepatic encephalopathy.** Herneth AM, Steindl P, Ferenci
P, Roth E, Hortnagl H Department of Internal Medicine IV, Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, University of Vienna, Austria. The increase of the brain levels of
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in hepatic encephalopathy (HE) suggests an
increased turnover of serotonin (5-HT). To study the role of tryptophan on the
increased brain 5-HT metabolism in HE, we attempted to monitor brain levels of
tryptophan in rats with thioacetamide-induced acute liver failure by
intravenous infusion of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA). The effect of this
treatment on 5-HT synthesis and metabolism was investigated in five brain
areas. BCAA-infusions (1 and 2 gm/kg/24 h) increased the ratio BCAA/aromatic
amino acids in plasma two- and fourfold, respectively, and lowered both plasma
and brain levels of tryptophan. At the higher BCAA-dose all parameters
suggesting an altered brain 5-HT metabolism (increased brain levels of 5-HT
and 5-HIAA, increased 5-HIAA/5-HT ratio) were almost completely normalized.
These results provide further evidence for the role of tryptophan in the
elevation of brain 5-HT metabolism and for a potential role of BCAA in the
treatment of HE.  
Tugai VA; Kurs'kii MD; Fedoriv OM. **[Effect of serotonin on Ca2+ transport in
mitochondria conjugated with the respiratory chain].** Ukrainskii
Biokhimicheskii Zhurnal, 1973 Jul-Aug, 45(4):408-12.  
Kurskii MD; Tugai VA; Fedoriv AN. **[Effect of serotonin and calcium on
separate components of respiratory chain of mitochondria in some rabbit
tissues].** Ukrainskii Biokhimicheskii Zhurnal, 1970, 42(5):584-8.  
Watanabe Y; Shibata S; Kobayashi B. **Serotonin-induced swelling of rat liver
mitochondria.** Endocrinologia Japonica, 1969 Feb, 16(1):133-47.  
Mahler DJ; Humoller FL. **The influence of serotonin on oxidative metabolism
of brain mitochondria.** Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology
and Medicine, 1968 Apr, 127(4):1074-9.  
Eur J Pharmacol 1994 Aug 11;261(1-2):25-32. **The effect of alpha
2-adrenoceptor antagonists in isolated globally ischemic rat hearts.** Sargent
CA, Dzwonczyk S, Grover G.J. The alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist, yohimbine,
has been reported to protect hypoxic myocardium. Yohimbine has several other
activities, including 5-HT receptor antagonism, at the concentrations at which
protection was found. Pretreatment with yohimbine (1-10 microM) caused a
concentration-dependent increase in reperfusion left ventricular developed
pressure and a reduction in end diastolic pressure and lactate dehydrogenase
release. The structurally similar compound rauwolscine (10 microM) also
protected the ischemic myocardium. In contrast, idozoxan (0.3-10 microM) or
tolazoline (10 microM) had no protective effects. The **cardioprotective
effects of yohimbine were partially reversed by 30 microM 5-HT. These results
indicate that the mechanism for the cardioprotective activity of yohimbine may
involve 5-HT receptor antagonistic activity.**  
Zubovskaia AM. **[Effect of serotonin on some pathways of oxidative metabolism
in the mitochondria of rabbit heart muscle].** Voprosy Meditsinskoi Khimii,
1968 Mar-Apr, 14(2):152-7.  
Warashina Y. **[On the effect of serotonin on phosphorylation of rat liver
mitochondria** ]. Hoppe-Seylers Zeitschrift fur Physiologische Chemie, 1967
Feb, 348(2):139-48.  
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 1997 Oct;7 Suppl 3:S323-S328. **Prevention of stress-
induced morphological and cognitive consequences**. McEwen BS, Conrad CD,
Kuroda Y, Frankfurt M, Magarinos AM, McKittrick C, Laboratory of
Neuroendocrinology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA. Atrophy
and dysfunction of the human hippocampus is a feature of aging in some
individuals, and this dysfunction predicts later dementia. There is reason to
believe that adrenal glucocorticoids may contribute to these changes, since
the elevations of glucocorticoids in Cushing's syndrome and during normal
aging are associated with atrophy of the entire hippocampal formation in
humans and are linked to deficits in short-term verbal memory. We have
developed a model of stress-induced atrophy of the hippocampus of rats at the
cellular level, and we have been investigating underlying mechanisms in search
of agents that will block the atrophy. Repeated restraint stress in rats for 3
weeks causes changes in the hippocampal formation that include suppression of
5-HT1A receptor binding and atrophy of dendrites of CA3 pyramidal neurons, as
well as impairment of initial learning of a radial arm maze task. **Because
serotonin is released by stressors and may play a role in the actions of
stress on nerve cells, we investigated the actions of agents that facilitate
or inhibit serotonin reuptake.** Tianeptine is known to enhance serotonin
uptake, and we compared it with fluoxetine, an inhibitor of 5-HT reuptake, as
well as with desipramine. Tianeptine treatment (10 mg/kg/day) prevented the
stress-induced atrophy of dendrites of CA3 pycamidal neurons, whereas neither
fluoxetine (10 mg/kg/day) nor desipramine (10 mg/kg/day) had any effect.
Tianeptine treatment also prevented the stress-induced impairment of radial
maze learning. Because **corticosterone- and stress-induced atrophy of CA3
dendrites is also blocked by phenytoin, an inhibitor of excitatory amino acid
release and actions, these results suggest that serotonin released by stress
or corticosterone may interact pre- or post-synaptically with glutamate
released by stress or corticosterone, and that the final common path may
involve interactive effects between serotonin and glutamate receptors on the
dendrites of CA3 neurons innervated by mossy fibers from the dentate gyrus. We
discuss the implications of these findings for treating cognitive impairments
and the risk for dementia in the elderly.**  
J Mol Cell Cardiol 1985 Nov;17(11):1055-63. **Digitoxin therapy partially
restores cardiac catecholamine and brain serotonin metabolism in congestive
heart failure.** Sole MJ, Benedict CR, Versteeg DH, de Kloet ER. The effect of
therapeutic doses of digitalis in modifying neural activity has been the
subject of considerable controversy. In earlier studies we reported **an
increase both in serotonergic activity in the posterior hypothalamus and pons-
medulla and in cardiac sympathetic tone in the failing cardiomyopathic
hamster.** In this study we examine the effects of doses of digitoxin, known
to be therapeutic for hamster heart failure, on monoamine neurotransmitter
metabolism in the brain and heart during the cardiomyopathy. Both digitoxin
and ASI-222, a polar amino-glycoside which does not cross the **** blood-brain
barrier, given either acutely (6 mg/kg ip) or chronically (2 mg/kg/day ip for
10 days), normalized the failure-induced increase in serotonin turnover in the
pons-medulla but had no effect on the changes in the posterior hypothalamus.
Digitoxin therapy also reduced cardiac and adrenal sympathetic activity
partially restoring cardiac catecholamine stores. In order to more clearly
define the pathways involved we measured serotonin (microgram/g protein) in 18
brain nuclei after 10 days of digitoxin or vehicle treatment. **Heart failure
was associated with an increase in serotonin in five nuclei: the mammillary
bodies, ventromedial, periventricular and paraventricular nuclei of the
hypothalamus, and the centralis superior nucleus of the raphe**. Digitoxin
therapy completely normalized the changes in the centralis superior and
ventromedialis nuclei; neither congestive heart failure nor digitoxin affected
serotonin levels in other nuclei. We conclude that there is an increase in
activity in specific brain serotonergic nuclei in congestive heart failure.
Digitalis reduces cardiac sympathetic tone and restores the changes in two of
these nuclei: the ventromedial and the centralis superior.+2  
Brain Res 2000 Jan 24;853(2):275-81. **Duration and distribution of
experimental muscle hyperalgesia in humans following combined infusions of
serotonin and bradykinin.** Babenko V, Svensson P, Graven-Nielsen T, Drewes
AM, Jensen TS, Arendt-Nielsen L.  
Eur J Pharmacol 1992 Feb 25;212(1):73-8. **5-HT3 receptor antagonists reverse
helpless behaviour in rats.** Martin P, Gozlan H, Puech AJ Departement de
Pharmacologie, Faculte de Medecine Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France. The
effects of the 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, zacopride, ondansetron and ICS
205-930, were investigated in an animal model of depression, the learned
helplessness test. Rats previously subjected to a session of 60 inescapable
foot-shocks exhibited a deficit of escape performance in three subsequent
shuttle-box sessions. The 5-HT3 receptor antagonists administered i.p. twice
daily on a chronic schedule (zacopride 0.03-2 mg/kg per day; ondansetron and
ICS 205-930: 0.125-2 mg/kg per day) reduced the number of escape failures at
low to moderate daily doses. This effect was not observed with the highest
dose(s) of zacopride, ondansetron and ICS 205-930 tested. These results
indicate that 5-HT3 antagonists may have effects like those of conventional
antidepressants in rats.  
Neuropharmacology 1992 Apr;31(4):323-30. **Presynaptic serotonin mechanisms in
rats subjected to inescapable shock.** Edwards E, Kornrich W, Houtten PV, Henn
FA. After exposure to uncontrollable shock training, two distinct groups of
rats can be defined in terms of their performance in learning to escape from a
controllable stress. Learned helpless rats do not learn to terminate the
controllable stress, whereas non-learned helpless rats learn this response as
readily as naive control rats do. These results implicate presynaptic
serotonin mechanisms in the behavioral deficit caused by uncontrollable shock.
In addition, a limbic-hypothalamic pathway may serve as a control center for
the behavioral response to stress.  
Neurochem Int 1992 Jul;21(1):29-35. **In vitro neurotransmitter release in an
animal model of depression**. Edwards E, Kornrich W, van Houtten P, Henn FA.
Sprague-Dawley rats exposed to uncontrollable shock can be separated by a
subsequent shock escape test into two groups: a "helpless" (LH) group which
demonstrates a deficit in escape behavior, and a "nonlearned helpless" (NLH)
group which shows no escape deficit and acquires the escape response as
readily as naive control rats (NC) do. The major finding concerned a
significant increase in endogenous and K(+)-stimulated serotonin (5-HT)
release in the hippocampal slices of LH rats. There were no apparent
differences in acetylcholine, dopamine and noradrenaline release in the
hippocampus of LH rats as compared to NLH and NC rats. These results add
further support to previous studies in our laboratory which implicate
presynaptic 5-HT mechanisms in the behavioral deficit caused by uncontrollable
shock.  
Psychiatry Res 1994 Jun;52(3):285-93. **In vivo serotonin release and learned
helplessness.** Petty F, Kramer G, Wilson L, Jordan S Mental Health Clinic,
Dallas Veterans Affairs Medical Center, TX. Learned helplessness, a behavioral
depression caused by exposure to inescapable stress, is considered to be an
animal model of human depressive disorder. Like human depression, learned
helplessness has been associated with a defect in serotonergic function, but
the nature of this relationship is not entirely clear. We have used in vivo
microdialysis brain perfusion to measure serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT)
in extracellular space of medial frontal cortex in conscious, freely moving
rats. Basal 5HT levels in rats perfused before exposure to tail-shock stress
did not themselves correlate with subsequent learned helplessness behavior.
However, 5HT release after stress showed a significant increase with helpless
behavior. **These data support the hypothesis that a cortical serotonergic
excess is causally related to the development of learned helplessness.**  
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1994 Jul;48(3):671-6. **Does learned helplessness
induction by haloperidol involve serotonin mediation?** Petty F, Kramer G,
Moeller M Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Dallas 75216. Learned helplessness
(LH) is a behavioral depression following inescapable stress. Helpless
behavior was induced in naive rats by the dopamine D2 receptor blocker
haloperidol (HDL) in a dose-dependent manner, with the greatest effects seen
at 20 mg/kg (IP). Rats were tested 24 h after injection. Haloperidol (IP)
increased release of serotonin (5-HT) in medial prefrontal cortex (MPC) as
measured by in vivo microdialysis. Perfusion of HDL through the probe in MPC
caused increased cortical 5-HT release, as did perfusion of both dopamine and
the dopamine agonist apomorphine. Our previous work found that increased 5-HT
release in MPC correlates with the development of LH. The present work
suggests that increased DA release in MPC, known to occur with both
inescapable stress and with HDL, may play a necessary but not sufficient role
in the development of LH. Also, this suggests that increased DA activity in
MPC leads to increased 5-HT release in MPC and to subsequent behavioral
depression.  
Stroke 1991 Nov;22(11):1448-51. **Platelet secretory products may contribute
to neuronal injury.** Joseph R, Tsering C, Grunfeld S, Welch KM Department of
Neurology, Henry Ford Hospital and Health Sciences Center, Detroit, MI 48202.
BACKGROUND: We do not fully understand the mechanisms for neuronal damage
following cerebral arterial occlusion by a thrombus that consists mainly of
platelets. The view that certain endogenous substances, such as glutamate, may
also contribute to neuronal injury is now reasonably well established. Blood
platelets are known to contain and secrete a number of substances that have
been associated with neuronal dysfunction. Therefore, we hypothesize that a
high concentration (approximately several thousand-fold higher than in plasma,
in our estimation) of locally released platelet secretory products derived
from the causative thrombus may contribute to neuronal injury and promote
reactive gliosis. SUMMARY OF COMMENT: We have recently been able to report
some direct support for this concept. When organotypic spinal cord cultures
were exposed to platelet and platelet products, a significant reduction in the
number and the size of the surviving neurons occurred in comparison with those
in controls. We further observed that serotonin, a major platelet product, has
neurotoxic properties. There may be other platelet components with similar
effect. **CONCLUSIONS: The hypothesis of platelet-mediated neurotoxicity gains
some support from these recent in vitro findings. The concept could provide a
new area of research in stroke, both at the clinical and basic levels.**  
J. Clin Psychopharmacol 1991 Aug; 11(4):277-9. **Disseminated intravascular
coagulation and acute myoglobinuric renal failure: a consequence of the
serotonergic syndrome.** Miller F, Friedman R, Tanenbaum J, Griffin A. Letter  
Chronobiol Int 2000 Mar;17(2):155-72. **Association of the antidiabetic
effects of bromocriptine with a shift in the daily rhythm of monoamine
metabolism within the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the Syrian hamster.** Luo S,
Luo J, Cincotta AH. **Bromocriptine, a dopamine D2 agonist, inhibits seasonal
fattening and improves seasonal insulin resistance in Syrian hamsters.**
Compared with control values, bromocriptine treatment significantly reduced
weight gain (14.9 vs. -2.9 g, p < .01) and the areas under the GTT glucose and
insulin curves by 29% and 48%, respectively (p < .05). Basal plasma insulin
concentration was markedly reduced throughout the day in bromocriptine-treated
animals without influencing plasma glucose levels. Bromocriptine reduced the
daily peak in FFA by 26% during the late light span (p < .05). Thus,
bromocriptine-induced resetting of daily patterns of SCN neurotransmitter
metabolism is associated with the effects of bromocriptine on attenuation of
the obese insulin-resistant and glucose-intolerant condition. A large body of
corroborating evidence suggests that such bromocriptine-induced changes in SCN
monoamine metabolism may be functional in its effects on metabolism.  
Eur J Pharmacol 1982 Jul 30;81(4):569-76. **Actions of serotonin antagonists
on dog coronary artery.** Brazenor RM, Angus JA. Serotonin released from
platelets may initiate coronary vasospasm in patients with variant angina. If
this hypothesis is correct, serotonin antagonists without constrictor activity
may be useful in this form of angina. We have investigated drugs classified as
serotonin antagonists on dog circumflex coronary artery ring segments in
vitro. Ergotamine, dihydroergotamine, **bromocriptine, lisuride, ergometrine,
ketanserin, trazodone, cyproheptadine and pizotifen caused non-competitive
antagonism of serotonin concentration-response curves**. In addition,
ketanserin, trazodone, bromocriptine and pizotifen inhibited noradrenaline
responses in concentrations similar to those required for serotonin
antagonism. All drugs with the exception of ketanserin, cyproheptadine and
pizotifen showed some degree of intrinsic constrictor activity. Methysergide
antagonized responses to serotonin competitively but also constricted the
coronary artery. The lack of a silent competitive serotonin antagonist
precludes a definite characterization of coronary serotonin receptors at this
time. However, the profile of activity observed for the antagonist drugs in
the coronary artery differs from that seen in other vascular tissues. Of the
drugs tested, ketanserin may be the most useful in variant angina since it is
a potent 5HT antagonist, lacks agonist activity and has alpha-adrenoceptor
blocking activity.  
Eur J Pharmacol 1985 May 8;111(2):211-20. **Maternal aggression in mice:
effects of treatments with PCPA, 5-HTP and 5-HT receptor antagonists.** Ieni
JR, Thurmond JB. Drug treatments which influence brain serotonergic systems
were administered to lactating female mice during the early postpartum period,
and their effects on aggressive behavior, locomotor activity and brain
monoamines were examined. P-chlorophenylalanine (200 and 400 mg/kg) and
5-hydroxytryptophan (100 mg/kg) inhibited fighting behavior of postpartum mice
toward unfamiliar male intruder mice. These drug-treated postpartum females
showed increased latencies to attack male intruders and also reduced
frequencies of attack. In addition, **postpartum mice treated with the
serotonin receptor antagonists, mianserin (2 and 4 mg/kg), methysergide (4
mg/kg) and methiothepin (0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg), displayed significantly less
aggressive behavior than control mice, as measured by reduced number of
attacks.** Whole brain monoamine and monoamine metabolite levels were measured
after drug treatments. The behavioral results are discussed in terms of drug-
induced changes in brain chemistry and indicate a **possible role for
serotonin in the mediation of maternal aggressive behavior of mice.**  
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1987 Apr;335(4):454-64. **Effects of
gepirone, an aryl-piperazine anxiolytic drug, on aggressive behavior and brain
monoaminergic neurotransmission. McMillen BA, Scott SM, Williams HL, Sanghera
MK.** Gepirone (BMY 13805), a buspirone analog, was used to determine the
antianxiety mechanism of the arylpiperazine class of drugs. Because of the
weak effects of these drugs on conflict behavior, isolation-induced aggressive
mice were used as the antianxiety model. Gepirone, like buspirone, potently
inhibited attacks against group housed intruder mice (ED50 = 4.5 mg/kg i.p.)
without causing sedation or ataxia. Inhibition of aggression was potentiated
by co-administration of 0.25 mg/kg methiothepin or 2.5 mg/kg methysergide.
Gepirone had variable effects on dopamine metabolism and reduced
5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT) metabolism about one third after a dose of 2.5
mg/kg. In contrast to buspirone, which markedly increased dopaminergic impulse
flow, gepirone inhibited the firing of most cells recorded from the substantia
nigra zona compacta in doses of 2.3-10 mg/kg i.v. and the effects were
reversible by administration of haloperidol. The common metabolite of
buspirone and gepirone, 1-(2-pyrimidinyl)-piperazine, caused increased firing
rates only. Gepirone potently inhibited serotonergic impulse flow recorded
from the dorsal raphe nucleus (88.3% after 0.04 mg/kg) and this effect was
partially reversed by serotonergic antagonists. Both buspirone and gepirone
displaced [3H]-5HT from the 5HT1a binding site in the hippocampus with IC50
values of 10 and 58 nM, respectively. Non-alkyl substituted aryl-piperazines
displaced [3H]-5HT from both 5HT1a and 5HT1b binding sites. Thus, although
gepirone may be a weak postsynaptic 5HT agonist, its primary effect is to
decrease 5HT neurotransmission. **In support of this conclusion was the
observed potentiation of antiaggressive effects by blocking 5HT receptors**
wit small doses of methiothepin or methysergide, which would exacerbate the
decreased release of 5HT caused by gepirone. These results are in harmony with
reports that decreased serotonergic activity has anxiolytic-like effects in
animal models of anxiety.  
Farmakol Toksikol 1975 Mar-Apr;38(2):148-51. **[Participation of the
serotonin-reactive brain structure in certain forms of behavior in golden
hamsters].** Popova NK, Bertogaeva VD. **A viviacious play of young hamsters
is shown to be accompanied by a drop of the serotonin level in the brain stem
and the subsequent slumber - by its rise** , while the corticosteroids content
of the peripheral blood with the playful behavior experiences no changes.
**Iprazid and 5-oxytryptophan inhibit the playful activity,** while
dioxyphenylalanina (DOPA) does not influence it. A similar depression of the
serotonin level in the brain stem was also noted in an aggressive behavior and
stress conditions arising when adult male-hamsters are grouped together. A
conclusion is drawn to the effect that changes in the content of serotonin in
the brain stem are **not associated with the emotional colouration of the
condition, but rather reflect the transition from the somnolence to a highly
active behavior.**  
Biol Psychiatry 1985 Sep;20(9):1023-5 **Triiodothyronine-induced reversal of
learned helplessness in rats.** Martin P, Brochet D, Soubrie P, Simon P.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2012. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

