![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Serotonin: Effects in disease, aging and inflammation**

Interpreting medical publications requires some skills that aren't needed for
understanding more strictly scientific reports, because medical writing often
takes into account the fact that physicians spend most of their time
interacting with the public, rather than studying. The public's understanding
of medicine is shaped by "public relations," by the introduction of words and
concepts that frame the argument. (The linguist George Lakoff summarized the
essence of public relations by observing that people reject facts that are
outside their view of reality, their mental framework.) Television and public
schools now frame the worldview of the affluent cultures, according to the
needs of the ruling powers. Long before specific prescription drugs could be
advertised directly to consumers, the medical and pharmaceutical industries
were creating a favorable frame for their products.  
  
Many years ago, public relations experts used expensive opinion polls to judge
the effectiveness of their efforts, but now there is a convenient way to see
how the general public is thinking: Wikipedia, the internet encyclopedia. The
success of corporate advertising can be seen in their recent article on
serotonin, which says "It is a well-known contributor to feelings of well-
being; therefore it is also known as a 'happiness hormone' despite not being a
hormone."  
  
The culture that has happy and unhappy hormones was a culture in which each
hormone had a receptor, a substance in a cell which, when its ligand was bound
to it, made the cell do something. Although that culture still has influence
in the 21st century, discoveries made between 1940 and 1970 showed that those
mechanical ideas of receptors didn't reflect biological reality. Albert Szent-
Gyorgi and the Pullmans showed that the electronic qualities of molecules
determined their functions, and Szent-Gyorgyi showed that the state of the
cell, tissue, and organism governed the effect of hormones and drugs. In the
1960s, substances with very different biological effects, such as
acetylcholine and adrenaline, were shown to be selectively bound to the same
cellular site in some cells. It was primarily the drug industry that created
and sustained the specific receptor doctrine. That doctrine suited the
recognition of their public relations- marketing experts, that successful
advertising had to be directed at the sixth-grade educational level. The ideas
of bioelectronics and context-sensitive molecules, like morphogenetic fields,
were just too complicated to sell well.  
  
Although metaphorical thinking can be creative and productive, metaphors
mustn't be taken literally. The identification of multiple types of receptor
for a given natural substance involves the use of different substances as
metaphors or similes for the natural substance. That type of pharmacology is
slowly being replaced by an attempt to understand state-dependent
sensitivities. The energetic state of a cell, and of the whole organism,
determines the meaning of events and conditions, such as the presence of the
"regulatory substances."  
  
The receptor culture can be tentatively disregarded when thinking about the
history of serotonin. In the 1930s Vittorio Erspamer identified an amine in
the intestine, that caused the intestine to contract. Then a group in England
extracted an amine from serum that caused blood vessels to contract, and
identified its chemical nature. Later, Erspamer showed that the intestinal
amine and the vascular amine were chemically the same. The English group who
had identified the substance by extracting tons of beef blood, wanted to find
sensitive ways to assay it for further studies, and in 1951 they gave a sample
to a pharmacologist, John Gaddum, who tested its effects on tissues including
blood vessels and rat uteruses.  
  
Gaddum tested the serotonin in combination with a variety of other drugs,
including ergot derivatives, that he knew acted on smooth muscles, and very
soon observed that LSD blocked the effects of serotonin. Since he knew that
LSD produced mental effects (Sandoz had distributed samples of it to
researchers in 1947), he reasoned that the brain might also contain serotonin,
and by 1952 was able to demonstrate that it does contain small amounts of it.
A couple of years later he suggested "that the mental effects of lysergic acid
diethylamide are due to interference with the normal action of this HT [5-
hydroxytryptamine, serotonin]." At the Rockefeller Institute in New York,
Woolley and Shaw also saw the antagonistic effects on smooth muscle, and drew
similar conclusions about the brain. Erspamer (Renic. sc. farmital. 1, 1,
1954) showed that LSD was a highly effective antagonist against the
antidiuresis caused by serotonin (enteramine).  
  
Around the same time, in the early 1950s, several people recognized that the
symptoms produced by administering an excess of serotonin were similar to
those experienced by people with intestinal tumors called argentaffinomas or
carcinoid tumors, which are usually in the small intestine or appendix. The
normal intestine contains about 95% of the serotonin in the body (and the
brain normally contains only about 1%), and in the normal person only about 1%
of the dietary tryptophan is converted to serotonin. But in an advanced case
of carcinoid, 60% of the tryptophan can be turned into serotonin. Especially
if the tumor has invaded the liver, the serotonin won't be destroyed by the
liver in the usual way, and will circulate in the bloodstream at high levels,
producing symptoms of flushing, sweating (sometimes dark-colored), diarrhea
(serotonin stimulates small intestine smooth muscle, but inhibits the large
[Bennett & Whitney, 1966]), nausea, anxiety, reduced urination, muscle and
joint pains, and, in late stages, very often cardiovascular disease
(especially inflammation, fibroma and calcification of the valves in the right
side of the heart) and aggressive behavior (Russo, et al., 2004) and
psychosis.  
  
Testing Gaddum's idea of antagonism between LSD and serotonin in humans,
Montanari and Tonini found that intramuscular injections of serotonin
antagonized the psychological effects of LSD. Other drugs, especially other
ergot derivatives, were more successful than LSD in blocking the effects of
serotonin (Dubach and Gsell, 1962). There have been suggestions that pregnancy
hormones could control serotonin excess (McCullough and Myers, 1965). Since
estrogen promotes serotonin, progesterone is likely to be the protective
factor (Donner & Handa, 2009; Hiroi, et al., 2006; Berman, et al., 2006;
Bethea, et al., 2000).  
  
More recently (Spigset, et al., 2004), it was found that LSD binding to a
presumed serotonin receptor was low in carcinoid patients, supporting the idea
of antagonism between the substances, but in the older studies symptoms,
rather than competition for binding to certain proteins, were the focus of
attention. The effects produced by injections and oral doses of synthetic
serotonin, and of substances that block the synthesis of serotonin, were
studied in both animals and humans. When a symptom such as clotting, flushing,
or diarrhea is produced by serotonin itself, or prevented by a blocker of
serotonin synthesis, "receptors" aren't an issue.  
  
Aldous Huxley was one of the first people to think about the general
biological meaning of drugs such as LSD. Referring to the ideas of Henri
Bergson and William Blake, he suggested that the brain usually acts as a
filter, or "reducing valve," to make us disregard most of the information we
are receiving through our senses, and that the psychedelic drugs temporarily
remove the filter, or open the sensory reducing valve. Bergson had suggested
that the filter was a practical measure needed to allow us to focus on
practical survival needs; Blake had suggested that the doors of perception
were kept closed for cultural reasons.  
  
Some recent reviews have discussed the evidence supporting the serotonin
system as primarily inhibitory and protective (Anne Frederickson, 1998, Neil
Goodman, 2002). Goodman describes the serotonergic system as one of our
"diffuse neuroregulatory systems," and suggests that drugs such as LSD weaken
its inhibitory, filtering effect. (Jacobs, 1983, 1987: by changes in the
effects of serotonin in the brain, produced by things that affect its
synthesis, release, catabolism, or receptor action.) LSD depresses the rate of
firing of serotonergic nerves in the raphe nuclei (Trulson and Jacobs, 1979)
causing arousal similar to stimulation of the reticular formation, as if by
facilitating sensory input into the reticular formation (Bowman and Rand,
1980).  
  
In European culture, some people--e.g., Plato, Descarte, Locke, Eccles,
probably even B.F. Skinner--have believed that mind and body are essentially
different things (analogous to computer hardware and its programs), while
another tradition--Blake, Lamarck, Darwin, C.L. Morgan, Pavlov, Reich, C.R.
Cloninger, for example--has emphasized the continuity of consciousness and
character with the body.  
  
Understanding the authoritarian personality has been an important issue in the
20th century. Wilhelm Reich used some old ideas about the nervous system that
were current near the beginning of the century, and Cloninger (1995) and
others (Netter, et al., 1996, Ruegg, et al., 1997, Gerra, 2000), toward the
end of the century, were able to incorporate the newer information about the
serotonergic-dopaminergic antagonisms. In this newer view, high serotonin
production causes behavioral inhibition and harm avoidance, which are traits
of the authoritarian personality, while anti-authorians tend to have "novelty
seeking" personalities, with high dopamine and low serotonin functions.  
  
In the 1960s, experimenters put electrodes into a chicken's optic nerve, and
when the chicken saw a checkerboard pattern, they could measure a patterned
electrical activity in the nerve. Without the light stimulating the retina,
the nerve was quiet. But when they gave the chicken LSD or similar chemicals,
they recorded patterned electrical activity in the nerve, in the absence of
external stimulation. Around the same time, other experimenters showed that
retinal fatigue quickly desensitized the retina, preventing the transmission
of impulses to the brain, except when the light pattern corresponded to
something familiar, showing that impulses from the brain are always involved
in renewing, in patterned ways, the sensitivity of the retina.  
  
The latter experiment shows that everyone's perception involves an outward-
directed activity of the brain, and the experiments using the chemical
stimulants suggested that the intensity of the outward- directed action can
vary.  
  
The inhibitory serotonergic "harm avoidance" system, and the opposing
excitatory activating "novelty seeking" systems are constantly being
influenced by many factors, including nutrition, hormones, environmental
challenges and opportunities, social interactions, seasons, and the rhythm of
night and day alternation.  
  
Several kinds of research are now showing that the effects of the environment
on the serotonergic system and its antagonists can influence every aspect of
health, not just the personality.  
  
For example, there have been suggestions that early life isolation of an
animal can affect its serotonergic activity and increase its anxiety,
aggression, or susceptibility to stress (Malick and Barnett, 1976, Malick,
1979, dos Santos, et al, 2010), and these effects are associated with
increased risk of becoming depressed, and developing organic problems. Animals
kept in darkness (or with blurring lenses) become nearsighted, as the eyeball
grows longer under the influence of increased serotonin, and the eyes are
protected against myopia by serotonin antagonists (George, et al., 2005). The
incidence of myopia is increasing, at least in countries with industrialized
economies, and is more common in females.  
  
Migraine headaches are also increasing in incidence. By the end of the 1950s,
it was widely accepted that migraine headaches and associated symptoms
including nausea and visual disturbances were caused by an excess of
serotonin, and antiserotonin drugs of various types were being used for
treatment. In one of the early studies of the use of LSD in psychotherapy,
some of the patients noticed that their chronic headaches had stopped. Cluster
headaches have also responded well to LSD and similar drugs (Sewell, et al.,
2006).  
  
Women have migraines more often than men do, and they tend to occur in
association with ovulation or menstruation. Estrogen inhibits monoamino
oxidase, MAO, especially the A form that is most active in detoxifying
serotonin, and it increases the enzymes that control the rate of serotonin
synthesis. During serotonin excess, the veins and capillaries of the pia mater
are engorged with blood, while circulation to the brain generally is
depressed. Visual symptoms are probably produced by contriction of arterioles,
while the pain is associated with engorged veins. Progesterone activates the
MAO-A, and has other antiserotonin effects on blood vessels and nerves.  
  
Recently (Shansky, et al., 2010; Figueiredo, et al., 2007), females have been
found to be more susceptible to stress, and to have reduced uptake of
serotonin (prolonging its effects), which increases glucocorticoids and ACTH.
Kendler, et al. (2005) have found that people with reduced serotonin uptake
are more susceptible to stress-induced depression.  
  
The increase of inhibitory serotonin with stress and depression is probably
biologically related to the role of serotonin in hibernation, which is an
extreme example of "harm avoidance" by withdrawal. A diet high in
polyunsaturated fat increases the tendency to go into hibernation, probably by
increasing the brain's uptake of tryptophan. When this is combined with an
increasingly cold environment, the form of MAO that removes serotonin
decreases its activity, while the form that removes norepinephrine increases
its activity. The metabolite of serotonin, 5-HIAA, decreases, as the effect of
serotonin increases.  
  
In experiments to investigate the mechanism of hibernation, animals were
injected with serotonin, at different environmental temperatures. In a cool
environment, the serotonin caused their temperature to fall, by decreasing
their heat production, and increasing their loss of heat (by causing
vasodilation in the skin, "flushing"). In a hot environment, serotonin can
cause the animal's temperature to rise.  
  
Serotonin can reduce the production of energy by inhibiting mitochondrial
respiratory enzymes (Medvedev, 1990, 1991), and by reduction of oxygen
delivery to tissues by vasoconstriction. It also appears to interfere with the
use of glucose (de Leiva, et al., 1978, Moore, et al., 2004).  
  
The brains of people with Alzheimer's disease have a decreased ability to
metabolize glucose, and high cortisol contributes to the altered glucose
metabolism, and to the destruction of nerve cells. People with Cloninger's
"harm avoidance" personality trait, which is closely associated with serotonin
(Hansenne, et al., 1999), are more likely to develop dementia (Clément, et
al., 2010). These observations are consistent with the stress-susceptibility
of people with high serotonin exposure, and to the effects of cortisol on
nerves and glucose-derived energy production.  
  
Researchers in Brasil have suggested that the serotonergic system facilitates
conditioned fear, while inhibiting the fight or flight reaction, and that this
can protectively limit the stress response (Graeff, et al., 1996). "5HT
systems reduce the impact of impending or actual aversive events. Anticipation
of an aversive event is associated with anxiety and this motivates avoidance
behaviour" (Deakin, 1990). In a stressful situation, the serotonergic nerves
can prevent ulcers. In other contexts, though, increased serotonin can cause
ulcers.  
  
The protective, defensive reactions involving serotonin's blocking of certain
types of reaction to ordinary stresses, are similar to the effects of
serotonin in hibernation and in Alzheimer's disease (Mamelak, 1997; Heininger,
2000; Perry, et al., 2002). In those extreme conditions, serotonin reduces
energy expenditure, eliminating all brain functions except those needed for
simple survival. These parallels suggest that improving energy production, for
example by providing ketones as an alternative energy source, while reducing
the stress hormones, might be able to replace the defensive reactions with
restorative adaptive nerve processes, preventing or reversing Alzheimer's
disease.  
  
One of the factors promoting excess cortisol production is intestinal
irritation, causing absorption of endotoxin and serotonin. Fermentable fibers
(including pectins and fructooligosaccharides) support the formation of
bacterial toxins, and can cause animals to become anxious and aggressive. Fed
to horses, some types of fiber increase the amount of serotonin circulating in
the blood. Grains, beans, and other seeds contain fermentable fibers that can
promote intestinal irritation.  
  
The liver has several ways to detoxify endotoxin and serotonin, but these can
fail as a result of poor nutrition and hypothyroidism.  
  
The lung can bind and destroy any excess serotonin that reaches it. A lack of
carbon dioxide makes platelets release their stored serotonin, and it probably
has the same effect in the lung endothelial cells. Without being able to bind
the serotonin, the enzyme (indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase) would be unable to
destroy it.  
  
An excess of tryptophan in the diet, especially with deficiencies of other
nutrients, can combine with inflammation to increase serotonin.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids promote the absorption of tryptophan by the brain,
and its conversion to serotonin. (A "deficiency" of polyunsaturated fat
decreases the expression of the enzyme that synthesizes serotonin [McNamara,
et al., 2009).  
  
Some fruits, including bananas, pineapples, and tomatoes, contain enough
serotonin to produce physiological effects in susceptible people.  
  
Besides avoiding foods containing fermentable fibers and starches that resist
quick digestion, eating fibrous foods that contain antibacterial chemicals,
such as bamboo shoots or raw carrots, helps to reduce endotoxin and serotonin.
Activated charcoal can absorb many toxins, including bacterial endotoxin, so
it is likely to reduce serotonin absorption from the intestine. Since it can
also bind or destroy vitamins, it should be used only intermittently. Frolkis,
et al. (1989, 1984) found that it extended median and average lifespan of
rats, beginning in old age (28 months) by 43% and 34%, respectively, when
given in large quantities (equivalent to about a cup per day for humans) for
ten days of each month.  
  
The amino acid theanine, found in tea, has been reported to decrease the
amount of serotonin in the brain, probably by decreasing its synthesis and
increasing its degradation.  
  
This seems to be the opposite of the processes in hibernation. Progesterone,
thyroid, and niacinamide (not nicotinic acid or inositol hexanicotinate) are
other safe substances that help to reduce serotonin formation, and/or
accelerate its elimination. (Niacinamide seems to increase serotonin uptake.)  
  
To provide usable energy to the over-stressed brain (and heart), R.L. Veech
has advocated the use of ketones, but the pure chemicals are expensive to
make. An easily available and inexpensive source of ketones (in the form of
ketoacids, which can be converted to amino acids if they aren't needed for
energy) is the juice extracted (with a centrifugal juicer) from raw potatoes,
which also contains proteins and other nutrients. The juice can be scrambled
like eggs, and is usually tolerated even by very debilitated people.  
  
Hypothyroidism is a very common cause of increased serotonin (e.g., Henley, et
al., 1998), and if the thyroid hormone is supplemented until symptoms are
resolved, it's likely that the serotonin will have been normalized.  
  
REFERENCES  
Vet Rec. 2010 Jan 30;166(5):133-6. Effect of diet on plasma tryptophan and
serotonin in trained mares and geldings. Alberghina D, Giannetto C, Visser EK,
Ellis AD.  
  
Bull Exp Biol Med. 2005 Jan;139(1):64-7. Effect of serotonin on respiration,
cerebral circulation, and blood pressure in rats. Aleksandrin VV, Tarasova NN,
Tarakanov IA. V. V. "Serotonin rapidly decreased local cerebral blood flow (by
almost 30%) and blood pressure."  
  
Aust N Z J Med. 1984 Dec;14(6):888-95. Serotonin antagonists. Anthony M. "The
realisation that serotonin plays a role not only in the carcinoid syndrome but
also in migraine, nociception, dumping syndrome, vascular disease and
hypertension, has led to an enormous amount of activity in search of serotonin
antagonists."  
  
Biull Eksp Biol Med 1976, 82(10): 1181-3, Role of the biological activity of
serotonin in the productin of the "shock lung" syndrome, Bazarevich GIa,
Deviataev AM, Likhtenshtein AO, Natsvlishvili BP, Sadeko MKh. Headache. 2006
Sep;46(8):1230-45. Serotonin in trigeminal ganglia of female rodents:
relevance to menstrual migraine.Berman NE, Puri V, Chandrala S, Puri S,
Macgregor R, Liverman CS, Klein RM.  
  
Biol Psychiatry. 2000 Mar 15;47(6):562-76. Steroid regulation of tryptophan
hydroxylase protein in the dorsal raphe of macaques. Bethea CL, Mirkes SJ,
Shively CA, Adams MR.  
Bowman, WC & Rand MJ, Textbook of Pharmacology, Second ediction. Oxford:
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1980.  
  
Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1962 Jan 1;135:142-51. Blockade of depressor
responses to serotonin and tryptamine by lysergic acid derivatives in the
chicken. Bunag RD, Walaszek EJ.  
  
J. Theor. Biol. 169:391-402.(1994). Rethinking "shape space": evidence from
simulated docking suggests that steric shape complementarity is not limiting
for antibody-antigen recognition and idiotypic interactions. Carneiro, J. and
Stewart, J. Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2010 Dec;8(4):243-54. [Personality
and risk of dementia]. [Article in French] Clément JP, Teissier MP.  
  
Nature Medicine 1995, 1:623-625. The psychobiological regulation of social
cooperation, Cloninger CR. JAMA. 1962 Jul 28;181:318-21. On migraine headache:
serotonin and serotonin antagonism. Dalessio DJ.  
  
Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 1991 Dec;6 Suppl 3:23-8; discussion 29-31.
Depression and 5HT. Deakin JF. "Much evidence is compatible with the idea that
5HT systems reduce the impact of impending or actual aversive events.
Anticipation of an aversive event is associated with anxiety and this
motivates avoidance behaviour--a normal adaptive response. There is evidence
that this is mediated by projections of the dorsal raphe nucleus and
associated 5HT2 and 5HT3 receptors."  
  
Exp Brain Res. 1983;51(1):73-6. Effect of acute and chronic 17 beta-estradiol
treatment on serotonin and 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid content of discrete
brain nuclei of ovariectomized rat. Di Paolo T, Diagle M, Picard V, Barden N.
"Increased serotonin content of the dorsal raphe nucleus and of the substantia
nigra were seen following acute (12 h or 24 h) administration of 17 beta-
estradiol to ovariectomized rats."  
  
Neuroscience. 2009 Oct 6;163(2):705-18. Epub 2009 Jun 23. Estrogen receptor
beta regulates the expression of tryptophan-hydroxylase 2 mRNA within
serotonergic neurons of the rat dorsal raphe nuclei. Donner N, Handa RJ.  
  
Br Med J. 1962 May 19;1(5289):1390-1. Carcinoid syndrome: alleviation of
diarrhoea and flushing with "Deseril" and Ro 5-1025. Dubach UC, Gsell OR.  
  
Br. J. Pharmacol Chemother. 1954; 9(1):31-6. Identification of the stable
antidiuretic substance (stable ADS) of serum with 5-hydroxytryptamine,
Erspamer V, Sala G.  
  
Brain Res. 1996 Mar 4;711(1-2):84-92. In vivo evidence for progesterone
dependent decreases in serotonin release in the hypothalamus and midbrain
central grey: relation to the induction of lordosis. Farmer CJ, Isakson TR,
Coy DJ, Renner KJ. "The rapid decrease in extracellular 5HT in the MCG
suggests that this effect may represent a non-genomic action of P."  
  
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab, 2007;292(4): E1173-E1182, Estrogen potentiates
adrenocortical responses to stress in female rats, Figueiredo HF, Ulrich-Lai
YM, Choi DC, Herman JP.  
  
Mechanisms of LSD: a glimpse into the serotonergic system, Anne Frederickson,
1998,serendip.brynmawr .edu/bb/neuro/neuro98/202s98-paper3/Frederickson3.html.  
  
Exp Gerontol. 1984;19(4):217-25. Enterosorption in prolonging old animal
lifespan. Frolkis VV, Nikolaev VG, Bogatskaya LN, Stupina AS, Shcherbitskaya
EV, Kovtun AI, Paramonova GI, Sabko VE, Shaposhnikov VM, Rushkevich YuE , et
al.  
  
Biomater Artif Cells Artif Organs. 1989;17(3):341-51. Effect of enterosorption
on animal lifespan. Frolkis VV, Nikolaev VG, Paramonova GI, Shchorbitskaya EV,
Bogatskaya LN, Stupina AS, Kovtun AI, Sabko VE, Shaposhnikov VM, Muradian KK,
et al.  
  
Brit. J. Pharmacol. 1954, 9, 240, Drugs which antagonize 5-hydroxytryptamine,
Gaddum JH, Hameed KA.  
  
Quart J exp Physiol 1953, 121, 15P, Antagonism between lysergic acid
diethylamide and 5- hydroxytryptamine, Gaddum JH.  
  
J Clin Invest. 1983 Jun;71(6):1806-21. Effects of parathyroid hormone on
skeletal muscle protein and amino acid metabolism in the rat. Garber AJ.  
  
Synapse. 2011 Mar;65(3):249-56. The microtubule cytoskeleton acts as a key
downstream effector of neurotransmitter signaling. Gardiner J, Overall R, Marc
J.  
  
Psychoneuroendocrinology 25: 479-496, 2000. Neuroendocrine correlates of
temperamental traits in humans, Gerra G, Zaimovic A, Timpano M, Zambelli U,
Delsignore R, Brambilla F.  
  
Br. J. Pharmacol Chemother 1957 Dec;12(4):498-503. The antagonism of the
vaxcular effects of 50hydroxytryptamine by BOL 148 and sodium salicylate in
the human subject. Glover WE, Marchall RJ, Whelan RF. "Sodium salicylate is
also a specific antagonist of 5-hydroxytryptamine....."  
  
J. of Psychoactive Drugs 2002, 34(3), p. 266, The serotonergic system and
mysticism: Could LSD and the nondrug-induced mystical experience share common
neural mechanism? Goodman N.  
  
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1996 May;54(1):129-41. Role of 5-HT in stress,
anxiety, and depression. Graeff FG, Guimarães FS, De Andrade TG, Deakin JF.  
  
Med Hypotheses. 2004;62(2):169-72. Biophotons, microtubules and CNS, is our
brain a "holographic computer"? Grass F, Klima H, Kasper S.  
  
Pharmacotherapy, 1995; 15(3):357-60. Treatment of depression with
cyproheptadine, Greenway SE, Pack AT, Greenway FL.  
  
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2000 Jun;11(6):1002-7. Effect of serotonin receptor
antagonist on phosphate excretion. Gross JM, Berndt TJ, Knox FG.  
  
Biochem J. 1996 Dec 1;320 ( Pt 2):615-21. Locally formed 5-hydroxytryptamine
stimulates phosphate transport in cultured opossum kidney cells and in rat
kidney. Hafdi Z, Couette S, Comoy E, Prie D, Amiel C, Friedlander G.  
  
Biological Psychology Volume 51, Issue 1, October 1999, Pages 77-81. Harm
avoidance and serotonin. Hansenne M, Ansseau M.  
  
Physiol Behav. 2004 Sep 15;82(2-3):357-68. Anxiety and aggression associated
with the fermentation of carbohydrates in the hindgut of rats. Hanstock TL,
Clayton EH, Li KM, Mallet PE.  
  
Endocr Rev. 1980 Fall;1(4):319-38. Biogenic amines and the secretion of
parathyroid hormone and calcitonin. Heath H 3rd. Rev Neurosci. 2000;11 Spec
No:213-328. A unifying hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease. IV. Causation and
sequence of events. Heininger K.  
  
Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1998 Dec;76(12):1120-31. Bulbospinal serotonergic
activity during changes in thyroid status. Henley WN, Bellush LL, Tressler M  
  
Biol Psychiatry. 2006 Aug 1;60(3):288-95. Estrogen selectively increases
tryptophan hydroxylase- 2 mRNA expression in distinct subregions of rat
midbrain raphe nucleus: association between gene expression and anxiety
behavior in the open field. Hiroi R, McDevitt RA, Neumaier JF.  
  
European Journal of Pharmacology. 1985; 111(2):211-220. Maternal aggression in
mice: Effects of treatments with PCPA, 5-HTP and 5-HT receptor antagonists.
Ieni JR and Thurmond JB.  
  
European J. Pharmacology 1983, 90:275-78, Raphe neurons-firing rate correlates
with size of drug response, Jacobs BL. American Scientist 1987, 75:386-91, How
hallucinogenic drugs work, Jacobs BL.  
  
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005 May;62(5):529-35. The interaction of stressful life
events and a serotonin transporter polymorphism in the prediction of episodes
of major depression: a replication. Kendler KS, Kuhn JW, Vittum J, Prescott
CA, Riley B.  
  
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1977 Sep;7(3):245-52. Fatty acid and tryptophan
changes on disturbing groups of rats and caging them singly. Knott PJ, Hutson
PH, Curzon G. Life Sci. 1991;48(2):175-81. State-dependent variation in the
inhibitory effect of [D-Ala2, D- Leu5]-enkephalin on hippocampal serotonin
release in ground squirrels. Kramarova LI, Lee TF, Cui Y, Wang LC.  
  
Metabolism. 1978 May;27(5):511-20. Serotoninergic activation and inhibition:
effects on carbohydrate tolerance and plasma insulin and glucagon. de Leiva A,
Tanenberg RJ, Anderson G, Greenberg B, Senske B, Goetz FC. (In Garattini, Adv
in Pharmacol 6, pages 131-2, McCullough and Myers, 1965.)  
  
J Psychiatr Res. 2009 Mar;43(6):656-63. Omega-3 fatty acid deficiency during
perinatal development increases serotonin turnover in the prefrontal cortex
and decreases midbrain tryptophan hydroxylase-2 expression in adult female
rats: dissociation from estrogenic effects. McNamara RK, Able J, Liu Y,
Jandacek R, Rider T, Tso P, Lipton JW.  
  
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1976 Jul;5(1):55-61. The role of serotonergic
pathways in isolation- induced aggression in mice.Malick JB, Barnett A. "All
of the antiserotonergic drugs selectively antagonized the fighting behavior of
the isolated mice...."  
  
Curr Dev Psychopharmacol. 1979;5:1-27. The pharmacology of isolation-induced
aggressive behavior in mice. Malick JB.  
  
J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1997 Jan;10(1):29-32. Neurodegeneration, sleep,
and cerebral energy metabolism: a testable hypothesis. Mamelak M.  
  
Vopr Med Khim. 1991 Sep-Oct;37(5):2-6. [The role of monoamine oxidase in the
regulation of mitochondrial energy functions]. Medvedev AE, Gorkin VZ.  
  
Vopr Med Khim. 1990 Sep-Oct;36(5):18-21. [Regulation by biogenic amines of
energy functions of mitochondria]. [Article in Russian] Medvedev AE.  
  
Diabetes. 2004 Jan;53(1):14-20. Portal serotonin infusion and glucose disposal
in conscious dogs. Moore MC, Geho WB, Lautz M, Farmer B, Neal DW, Cherrington
AD.  
  
Neuropsychobiology 1996; 34:155-165, Serotonin and dopamine as mediators of
sensation seeking behavior, Netter P, Henning J, Roed IS. Comp Biochem Physiol
C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2002 Dec;133(4):507-13.  
  
Comparative biology and pathology of oxidative stress in Alzheimer and other
neurodegenerative diseases: beyond damage and response. Perry G, Taddeo MA,
Nunomura A, Zhu X, Zenteno-Savin T, Drew KL, Shimohama S, Avila J, Castellani
RJ, Smith MA.  
  
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1993 Sep;46(1):9-13. Involvement of brain tryptophan
hydroxylase in the mechanism of hibernation. Popova NK, Voronova IP, Kulikov
AV.  
  
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1981 Jun;14(6):773-7. Brain serotonin metabolism in
hibernation. Popova NK, Voitenko NN. Biol Psychiatry 42: 1123-1129, 1997,
Clomipramine challenge responses covary with Tridimensional Personality
Questionnaire scores in healthy subjects, Ruegg RG, Gilmore J, Ekstrom RD,
Corrigin M, Knight B, et al.  
  
J Psychopharmacol. 2010 May;24(5):725-31. Epub 2009 Nov 25. Social separation
and diazepam withdrawal increase anxiety in the elevated plus-maze and
serotonin turnover in the median raphe and hippocampus. dos Santos L, de
Andrade TG, Graeff FG.  
  
Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1975 Jan;10(1):37-50. Thyroid hormone control
of serotonin in developing rat brain.Schwark WS, Keesey RR. "Experimental
cretinism, induced by daily propylthiouracil treatment starting at birth,
caused increased serotonin levels in all brain regions studied."  
  
Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1920-2. Cluster headache research, Sewell RA,
Halpern JH, Pope HG. Cerebral Cortex 2010 Nov;20(11):2560-7. Estrogen promotes
stress sensitivity in a prefrontal cortex-amygdala pathway,Shansky RM, Hamo C,
Hof PR, Lou W, McEwen BS, Morrison JH.  
  
Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2004;64(1):3-8. Platelet serotonin 5-HT2A receptor
binding in patients with carcinoid tumor. Spigset O, Kristoffersson A,
Mjörndal T.  
  
Science 1979, 205:515-18, Dissociations between the effects of LSD on behavior
and raphe unit activity in freely moving cats, Trulson ME & Jacobs BL.  
  
Neurobiol Aging. 1985 Summer;6(2):107-11. Synergistic effects of estrogen and
serotonin- receptor agonists on the development of pituitary tumors in aging
rats. Walker RF, Cooper RL.  
  
Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1998 Apr;62(4):816-7. Theanine-induced reduction of
brain serotonin concentration in rats.Yokogoshi H, Mochizuki M, Saitoh K.  
  
Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1995 Apr;59(4):615-8. Reduction effect of theanine
on blood pressure and brain 5-hydroxyindoles in spontaneously hypertensive
rats. Yokogoshi H, Kato Y, Sagesaka YM, Takihara-Matsuura T, Kakuda T,
Takeuchi N.  
  
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1980 Dec;51(6):1274-8. Serotonin stimulates adenosine
3',5'- monophosphate accumulation in parathyroid adenoma. Zimmerman D, Abboud
HE, George LE, Edis AJ, Dousa TP.  
  
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 1990 Winter;14(4):507-10. 5-HT-related drugs and human
experimental anxiety. Zuardi AW.  
  
  

  
© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2015. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

