![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E**  

**Sugar issues**

Since the first doctor noticed, hundreds of years ago, that the urine of a
diabetic patient tasted sweet, it has been common to call the condition the
sugar disease, or sugar diabetes, and since nothing was known about
physiological chemistry, it was commonly believed that eating too much sugar
had to be the cause, since the ability of the body to convert the protein in
tissues into sugar wasnt discovered until 1848, by Claude Bernard (who
realized that diabetics lost more sugar than they took in). Even though
patients continued to pass sugar in their urine until they died, despite the
elimination of sugar from their diet, medical policy required that they be
restrained to keep them from eating sugar. That prescientific medical belief,
that eating sugar causes diabetes, is still held by a very large number,
probably the majority, of physicians.

Originally, diabetes was understood to be a wasting disease, but as it became
common for doctors to measure glucose, obese people were often found to have
hyperglycemia, so the name diabetes has been extended to them, as type 2
diabetes. High blood sugar is often seen along with high blood pressure and
obesity in Cushing's syndrome, with excess cortisol, and these features are
also used to define the newer metabolic syndrome.

Following the old reasoning about the sugar disease, the newer kind of obese
diabetes is commonly blamed on eating too much sugar. Obesity, especially a
fat waist, and all its associated health problems, are said by some doctors to
be the result of eating too much sugar, especially fructose. (Starch is the
only common carbohydrate that contains no fructose.) Obesity is associated not
only with diabetes or insulin resistance, but also with atheroslcerosis and
heart disease, high blood pressure, generalized inflammation, arthritis,
depression, risk of dementia, and cancer.

There is general agreement about the problems commonly associated with
obesity, but not about the causes or the way to prevent or cure obesity and
the associated conditions.

In an earlier newsletter, I wrote about P. A. Piorry in Paris, in 1864, and
Dr. William Budd in England, in 1867, who treated diabetes by adding a large
amount of ordinary sugar, sucrose, to the patient's diet. Glucose was known to
be the sugar appearing in the diabetics' urine, but sucrose consists of half
glucose, and half fructose. In 1874, E. Kulz in Germany reported that
diabetics could assimilate fructose better than glucose. In the next decades
there were several more reports on the benefits of feeding fructose, including
the reduction of glucose in the urine. With the discovery of insulin in 1922,
fructose therapy was practically forgotten, until the 1950s when new
manufacturing techniques began to make it economical to use.

Its use in diabetic diets became so popular that it became available in health
food stores, and was also used in hospitals for intravenous feeding.

However, while fructose was becoming popular, the cholesterol theory of heart
disease was being promoted. This was the theory that eating foods containing
saturated fat and cholesterol caused heart disease. (My newsletter,
Cholesterol, longevity, intelligence, and health, discussed the development of
that theory.)

A Swedish physician and researcher, Uffe Ravnskov, has reviewed the medical
arguments for the theory that lipids in the blood are the cause of
atherosclerosis and heart disease, and shows that there has never been
evidence of causality, something which some people, such as Broda Barnes,
understood from the beginning. In the 1950s, an English professor, John
Yudkin, didn't accept the idea that eating saturated fat was the cause of high
blood levels of triglycerides and cholesterol, but he didnt question the
theory that lipids in the blood caused the circulatory disease. He argued that
it was sugar, especially the fructose component of sucrose, rather than
dietary fat, that caused the high blood lipids seen in the affluent countries,
and consequently the diseases. He was sure it was a specific chemical effect
of the fructose, because he argued that the nutrients that were removed in
refining white flour and white sugar were insignificant, in the whole diet.

Following the publication of Yudkin's books, and coinciding with increasing
promotion of the health benefits of unsaturated vegetable oils, many people
were converted to Yudkin's version of the lipid theory of heart disease, i.e.,
that the "bad lipids" in the blood are the result of eating sugar. This has
grown into essentially a cult, in which sugar is believed to act like an
intoxicant, forcing people to eat until they become obese, and develop the
"metabolic syndrome," and "diabetes," and the many problems that derive from
that.

The publicity campaign against "saturated fat" as an ally of cholesterol
derived its support from the commercial promotion of the polyunsaturated seed
oils as food for humans. Although the early investigators of vitamin E knew
that the polyunsaturated oils could cause sterility, and others later found
that their use in commercial animal foods could cause brain degeneration,
there were a few biologists (mostly associated with George Burr) who believed
that this type of fatty acid is an essential nutrient.

George and Mildred Burr had created what they claimed to be a disease in rats
caused by the absence of linoleic or linolenic acid in their food. Although
well known researchers had previously published evidence that animals on a fat
free diet were healthy--even healthier than on a normal diet--Burr and his
wife published their contradictory claim without bothering to discuss the
conflicting evidence. I haven't seen any instance in which Burr or his
followers ever mentioned the conflicting evidence. Although other biologists
didn't accept Burr's claims, and several researchers subsequently published
contrary results, he later became famous when the seed oil industry wanted
scientific-seeming reasons for selling their product as an "essential" food.
The fact that eating the polyunsaturated fats could cause the blood
cholesterol level to decrease slightly was advertised as a health benefit.
Later, when human trials showed that more people on the "heart healthy" diet
died of heart disease and cancer, more conventional means of advertising were
used instead of human tests.

Burr's experimental diet consisted of purified casein (milk protein) and
purified sucrose, supplemented with a vitamin concentrate and some minerals.
Several of the B vitamins weren't known at the time, and the mineral mixture
lacked zinc, copper, manganese, molybdenum, and selenium. More of the
essential nutrients were unknown in his time than in Yudkin's, so his failure
to consider the possibility of other nutritional deficiencies affecting health
is more understandable.

In 1933, Burr observed that his fat-deficient rats consumed oxygen at an
extremely high rate, and even then, the thought didn't occur to him that other
nutritional deficiencies might have been involved in the condition he
described. Ordinarily, the need for vitamins and minerals corresponds to the
rate at which calories are being burned, the metabolic rate. Burr recalled
that the rats on the fat free diet drank more water, and he reasoned that the
absence of linoleic or linolenic acid in their skin was allowing water vapor
to escape at a high rate. He didn't explain why the saturated fats the rats
were synthesizing from sugar didn't serve at least as well as a "vapor
barrier"; they are more effective at water-proofing than unsaturated fats,
because of their greater hydrophobicity. The condensed and cross-linked
keratin protein in skin cells is the main reason for the skin's relatively low
permeability. When an animal is burning calories at a higher rate, its sweat
glands are more actively maintaining a normal body temperature, cooling by
evaporation; the amount of water evaporated is an approximate measure of
metabolic rate, and of thyroid function.

In 1936, a man in Burr's lab, William Brown, agreed to eat a similar diet for
six months, to see whether the "essential fatty acid deficiency" affected
humans as it did rats.

The diet was very similar to the rats', with a large part of the daily 2500
calories being provided at hourly intervals during the day by sugar syrup
(flavored with citric acid and anise oil), protein from 4 quarts of special
fat-free skimmed milk, a quart of which was made into cottage cheese, the
juice of half an orange, and a "biscuit" made with potato starch, baking
powder, mineral oil, and salt, with iron, viosterol (vitamin D), and carotene
supplemented.

Brown had suffered from weekly migraine headaches since childhood, and his
blood pressure was a little high when he began the diet. After six weeks on
the diet, his migraines stopped, and never returned. His plasma inorganic
phosphorus declined slightly during the experiment (3.43 mg./100 cc. of plasma
and 2.64 on the diet, and after six months on a normal diet 4.2 mg.%), and his
total serum proteins increased from 6.98 gm.% to 8.06 gm.% on the experimental
diet. His leucocyte count was lower on the high sugar diet, but he didn't
experience colds or other sickness. On a normal diet, his systolic blood
pressure varied from 140 to 150 mm. of mercury, the diastolic, 95 to 100.
After a few months on the sugar and milk diet, his blood pressure had lowered
to about 130 over 85 to 88. Several months after he returned to a normal diet,
his blood pressure rose to the previous level.

On a normal diet, his weight was 152 pounds, and his metabolic rate was from
9% to 12% below normal, but after six months on the diet it had increased to
2% below normal. After three months on the sugar and milk diet, his weight
leveled off at 138 pounds. After being on the diet, when he ate 2000 calories
of sugar and milk within two hours, his respiratory quotient would exceed 1.0,
but on his normal diet his maximum respiratory quotient following those foods
was less than 1.0.

The effect of diabetes is to keep the respiratory quotient low, since a
respiratory quotient of one corresponds to the oxidation of pure carbohydrate,
and extreme diabetics oxidize fat in preference to carbohydrate, and may have
a quotient just a little above 0.7. The results of Brown's and Burr's
experiments could be interpreted to mean that the polyunsaturated fats not
only lower the metabolic rate, but especially interfere with the metabolism of
sugars. In other words, they suggest that the normal diet is diabetogenic.

During the six months of the experiment, the unsaturation of Brown's serum
lipids decreased. The authors reported that "There was no essential change in
the serum cholesterol as a result of the change in diet." However, in November
and December, two months before the experiment began, it had been 252 mg.% in
two measurements. At the beginning of the test, it was 298, two weeks later,
228, and four months later, 206 mg%. The total quantity of lipids in his blood
didn't seem to change much, since the triglycerides increased as the
cholesterol decreased.

By the time of Brown's experiment, other researchers had demonstrated that the
cholesterol level was increased in hypothyroidism, and decreased as thyroid
function, and oxygen consumption, increased. If Burr's team had been reading
the medical literature, they would have understood the relation between
Brown's increased metabolic rate and decreased cholesterol level. But they did
record the facts, which is valuable.

The authors wrote that "The most interesting subjective effect of the 'fat-
free' regimen was the definite disappearance of a feeling of fatigue at the
end of the day's work."

A lowered metabolic rate and energy production is a common feature of aging
and most degenerative diseases. From the beginning of an animal's life, sugars
are the primary source of energy, and with maturation and aging there is a
shift toward replacing sugar oxidation with fat oxidation. Old people are able
to metabolize fat at the same rate as younger people, but their overall
metabolic rate is lower, because they are unable to oxidize sugar at the same
high rate as young people. Fat people have a similar selectively reduced
ability to oxidize sugar.

Stress and starvation lead to a relative reliance on the fats stored in the
tissues, and the mobilization of these as circulating free fatty acids
contributes to a slowing of metabolism and a shift away from the use of
glucose for energy. This is adaptive in the short term, since relatively
little glucose is stored in the tissues (as glycogen), and the proteins making
up the body would be rapidly consumed for energy, if it were not for the
reduced energy demands resulting from the effects of the free fatty acids.

One of the points at which fatty acids suppress the use of glucose is at the
point at which it is converted into fructose, in the process of glycolysis.
When fructose is available, it can by-pass this barrier to the use of glucose,
and continue to provide pyruvic acid for continuing oxidative metabolism, and
if the mitochondria themselves aren't providing sufficient energy, it can
leave the cell as lactate, allowing continuing glycolytic energy production.
In the brain, this can sustain life in an emergency.

Many people lately have been told, as part of a campaign to explain the high
incidence of fatty liver degeneration in the US, supposedly resulting from
eating too much sugar, that fructose can be metabolized only by the liver. The
liver does have the highest capacity for metabolizing fructose, but the other
organs do metabolize it.

If fructose can by-pass the fatty acids' inhibition of glucose metabolism, to
be oxidized when glucose can't, and if the metabolism of diabetes involves the
oxidation of fatty acids instead of glucose, then we would expect there to be
less than the normal amount of fructose in the serum of diabetics, although
their defining trait is the presence of an increased amount of glucose.
According to Osuagwu and Madumere (2008), that is the case. If a fructose
deficiency exists in diabetes, then it is appropriate to supplement it in the
diet.

Besides being one of the forms of sugar involved in ordinary energy
production, interchangeable with glucose, fructose has some special functions,
that aren't as well performed by glucose. It is the main sugar involved in
reproduction, in the seminal fluid and intrauterine fluid, and in the
developing fetus. After these crucial stages of life are past, glucose becomes
the primary molecular source of energy, except when the system is under
stress. It has been suggested (Jauniaux, et al., 2005) that the predominance
of fructose rather than glucose in the embryo's environment helps to maintain
ATP and the oxidative state (cellular redox potential) during development in
the low-oxygen environment. The placenta turns glucose from the mother's blood
into fructose, and the fructose in the mother's blood can pass through into
the fetus, and although glucose can move back from the fetus into the mother's
blood, fructose is unable to move in that direction, so a high concentration
is maintained in the fluids around the fetus.

The control of the redox potential is sometimes called the "redox signalling
system," since it coherently affects all processes and conditions in the cell,
including pH and hydrophobicity. For example, when a cell prepares to divide,
the balance shifts strongly away from the oxidative condition, with increases
in the ratios of NADH to NAD+, of GSH to GSSG, and of lactate to pyruvate.
These same shifts occur during most kinds of stress.

In natural stress, decreased availability of oxygen or nutrients is often the
key problem, and many poisons can produce similar interference with energy
production, for example cyanide or carbon monoxide, which block the use of
oxygen, or ethanol, which inhibits the oxidation of sugars, fats, and amino
acids (Shelmet, et al., 1988).

When oxygen isn't constantly removing electrons from cells (being chemically
reduced by them) those electrons will react elsewhere, creating free radicals
(including activated oxygen) and reduced iron, that will create inappropriate
chemical reactions (Niknahad, et al., 1995; MacAllister, et al., 2011).

Stresses and poisons of many different types, interfering with the normal flow
of electrons to oxygen, produce large amounts of free radicals, which can
spread structural and chemical damage, involving all systems of the cell.
Ethyl alcohol is a common potentially toxic substance that can have this
effect, causing oxidative damage by allowing an excess of electrons to
accumulate in the cell, shifting the cells' balance away from the stable
oxidized state.

Fructose has been known for many years to accelerate the oxidation of ethanol
(by about 80%). Oxygen consumption in the presence of ethanol is increased by
fructose more than by glucose (Thieden and Lundquist, 1967). Besides removing
the alcohol from the body more quickly, it prevents the oxidative damage, by
maintaining or restoring the cell's redox balance, the relatively oxidized
state of the NADH/NAD+, lactate/pyruvate, and GSH/GSSH systems. Although
glucose has this stabilizing, pro-oxidative function in many situations, this
is a general feature of fructose, sometimes allowing it to have the opposite
effect of glucose on the cell's redox state. It seems to be largely this
generalized shift of the cell's redox state towards oxidation that is behind
the ability of a small amount of fructose to catalyze the more rapid oxidation
of a large amount of glucose.

Besides protecting against the reductive stresses, fructose can also protect
against the oxidative stress of increased hydrogen peroxide (Spasojevic, et
al., 2009). Its metabolite, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, is even more effective
as an antioxidant.

Keeping the metabolic rate high has many benefits, including the rapid renewal
of cells and their components, such as cholesterol and other lipids, and
proteins, which are always susceptible to damage from oxidants, but the high
metabolic rate also tends to keep the redox system in the proper balance,
reducing the rate of oxidative damage.

Endotoxin absorbed from the intestine is one of the ubiquitous stresses that
tends to cause free radical damage. Fructose, probably more than glucose, is
protective against damage from endotoxin.

Many stressors cause capillary leakage, allowing albumin and other blood
components to enter extracellular spaces or to be lost in the urine, and this
is a feature of diabetes, obesity, and a variety of inflammatory and
degenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease (Szekanecz and Koch, 2008;
Ujiie, et al., 2003). Although the mechanism isn't understood, fructose
supports capillary integrity; fructose feeding for 4 and 8 weeks caused a 56%
and 51% reduction in capillary leakage, respectively (Chakir, et al., 1998;
Plante, et al., 2003).

The ability of the mitochondria to oxidize pyruvic acid and glucose is
characteristically lost to some degree in cancer. When this oxidation fails,
the disturbed redox balance of the cell will usually lead to the cell's death,
but if it can survive, this balance favors growth and cell division, rather
than differentiated function. This was Otto Warburg's discovery, that was
rejected by official medicine for 75 years.

Cancer researchers have become interested in this enzyme system that controls
the oxidation of pyruvic acid (and thus sugar) by the mitochondria, since
these enzymes are crucially defective in cancer cells (and also in diabetes).
The chemical DCA, dichloroacetate, is effective against a variety of cancers,
and it acts by reactivating the enzymes that oxidize pyruvic acid. Thyroid
hormone, insulin, and fructose also activate these enzymes. These are the
enzymes that are inactivated by excessive exposure to fatty acids, and that
are involved in the progressive replacement of sugar oxidation by fat
oxidation, during stress and aging, and in degenerative diseases; for example,
a process that inactivates the energy-producing pyruvate dehydrogenase in
Alzheimer's disease has been identified (Ishiguro, 1998). Niacinamide, by
lowering free fatty acids and regulating the redox system, supporting sugar
oxidation, is useful in the whole spectrum of metabolic degenerative diseases.

A few times in the last 80 years, people (starting with Nasonov) have
recognized that the hydrophobicity of a cell changes with its degree of
excitation, and with its energy level. Recently, even in non-living physical-
chemical systems, hydrophobicity and redox potential have been seen to vary
together and to influence each other. Recent work shows how the oxidation of
fatty acids contributes to the dissolution of mitochondria (Macchioni, et al.,
2010). At first glance it might seem odd that the presence of fatty material
could reduce the "fat loving" (lipophilic, equivalent to hydrophobic) property
of a cell, but the fat used as fuel is in the form of fatty acids, which are
soap-like, and spontaneously introduce "wetness" into the relatively water-
resistant cell substance. The presence of fatty acids, impairing the last
oxidative stage of respiration, increases the tendency of the mitochondrion to
release its cytochrome c into the cell in a reduced form, leading to the
apoptotic death of the cell. The oxidized form of the cytochrome is more
hydrophobic, and stable.

Burr didn't understand that it was his rats' high sugar diet, freed of the
anti-oxidative unsaturated fatty acids, that caused their extremely high
metabolic rate, but since that time many experiments have made it clear that
it is specifically the fructose component of sucrose that is protective
against the antimetabolic fats.

Although Brown, et al., weren't focusing on the biological effects of sugar,
their results are important in the history of sugar research because their
work was done before the culture had been influenced by the development of the
lipid theory of heart disease, and the later idea that fructose is responsible
for increasing the blood lipids.

In 1963 and 1964, experiments (Carroll, 1964) showed that the effects of
glucose and fructose were radically affected by the type of fat in the diet.
Although 0.6% of calories as polyunsaturated fat prevents the appearance of
the Mead acid (which is considered to indicate a deficiency of essential fats)
the "high fructose" diets consistently add 10% or more corn oil or other
highly unsaturated fat to the diet. These large quantities of PUFA aren't
necessary to prevent a deficiency, but they are needed to obscure the
beneficial effects of fructose.

Many studies have found that sucrose is less fattening than starch or glucose,
that is, that more calories can be consumed without gaining weight. During
exercise, the addition of fructose to glucose increases the oxidation of
carbohydrate by about 50% (Jentjens and Jeukendrup, 2005). In another
experiment, rats were fed either sucrose or Coca-Cola and Purina chow, and
were allowed to eat as much as they wanted (Bukowiecki, et al, 1983). They
consumed 50% more calories without gaining extra weight, relative to the
standard diet. Ruzzin, et al. (2005) observed rats given a 10.5% or 35%
sucrose solution, or water, and observed that the sucrose increased their
energy consumption by about 15% without increasing weight gain. Macor, et al.
(1990) found that glucose caused a smaller increase in metabolic rate in obese
people than in normal weight people, but that fructose increased their
metabolic rate as much as it did that of the normal weight people. Tappy, et
al. (1993) saw a similar increase in heat production in obese people, relative
to the effect of glucose. Brundin, et al. (1993) compared the effects of
glucose and fructose in healthy people, and saw a greater oxygen consumption
with fructose, and also an increase in the temperature of the blood, and a
greater increase in carbon dioxide production.

These metabolic effects have led several groups to recommend the use of
fructose for treating shock, the stress of surgery, or infection (e.g.,
Adolph, et al., 1995).

The commonly recommended alternative to sugar in the diet is starch, but many
studies show that it produces all of the effects that are commonly ascribed to
sucrose and fructose, for example hyperglycemia (Villaume, et al., 1984) and
increased weight gain. The addition of fructose to glucose "can markedly
reduce hyperglycemia during intraportal glucose infusion by increasing net
hepatic glucose uptake even when insulin secretion is compromised" (Shiota, et
al., 2005). "Fructose appears most effective in those normal individuals who
have the poorest glucose tolerance" (Moore, et al., 2000).

Lipid peroxidation is involved in the degenerative diseases, and many
publications argue that fructose increases it, despite the fact that it can
increase the production of uric acid, which is a major component of our
endogenous antioxidant system (e.g., Waring, et al., 2003). When rats were fed
for 8 weeks on a diet with 18% fructose and 11% saturated fatty acids, the
content of polyunsatured fats in the blood decreased, as they had in the
Brown, et al., experiment, and their total antioxidant status was increased
(Girard, et al., 2005). When stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats were
given 60% fructose, superoxide dismutase in their liver was increased, and the
authors suggest that this "may constitute an early protective mechanism"
(Brosnan and Carkner, 2008). When people were given a 300 calorie drink
containing glucose, or fructose, or orange juice, those receiving the glucose
had a large increase in oxidative and inflammatory stress (reactive oxygen
species, and NF-kappaB binding), and those changes were absent in those
receiving the fructose or orange juice (Ghanim, et al., 2007).

One of the observations in Brown, et al., was that the level of phosphate in
the serum decreased during the experimental diet. Several later studies show
that fructose increases the excretion of phosphate in the urine, while
decreasing the level in the serum. However, a common opinion is that it's only
the phosphorylation of fructose, increasing the amount in cells, that causes
the decrease in the serum; that could account for the momentary drop in serum
phosphate during a fructose load, but--since there is only so much phosphate
that can be bound to intracellular fructose--it can't account for the chronic
depression of the serum phosphate on a continuing diet of fructose or sucrose.

There are many reasons to think that a slight reduction of serum phosphate
would be beneficial. It has been suggested that eating fruit is protective
against prostate cancer, by lowering serum phosphate (Kapur, 2000). The aging
suppressing gene discovered in 1997, named after the Greek life-promoting
goddess Klotho, suppresses the reabsorption of phosphate by the kidney (which
is also a function of the parathyroid hormone), and inhibits the formation of
the activated form of vitamin D, opposing the effect of the parathyroid
hormone. In the absence of the gene, serum phosphate is high, and the animal
ages and dies prematurely. In humans, in recent years a very close association
has been has been documented between increased phosphate levels, within the
normal range, and increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Serum phosphate is
increased in people with osteoporosis (Gallagher, et al., 1980), and various
treatments that lower serum phosphate improve bone mineralization, with the
retention of calcium phosphate (Ma and Fu, 2010; Batista, et al., 2010; Kelly,
et al., 1967; Parfitt, 1965; Kim, et al., 2003).

At high altitude, or when taking a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, there is more
carbon dioxide in the blood, and the serum phosphate is lower; sucrose and
fructose increase the respiratory quotient and carbon dioxide production, and
this is probably a factor in lowering the serum phosphate.

Fructose affects the body's ability to retain other nutrients, including
magnesium, copper, calcium, and other minerals. Comparing diets with 20% of
the calories from fructose or from cornstarch, Holbrook, et al. (1989)
concluded "The results indicate that dietary fructose enhances mineral
balance." Ordinarily, things (such as thyroid and vitamin D) which improve the
retention of magnesium and other nutrients are considered good, but the
fructose mythology allows researchers to conclude, after finding an increased
magnesium balance, with either 4% or 20% of energy from fructose (compared to
cornstarch, bread, and rice), "that dietary fructose adversely affects
macromineral homeostasis in humans." (Milne and Nielsen, 2000).

Another study compared the effects of a diet with plain water, or water
containing 13% glucose, or sucrose, or fructose, or high fructose corn syrup
on the properties of rats' bones: Bone mineral density and mineral content,
and bone strength, and mineral balance. The largest differences were between
animals drinking the glucose and the fructose solutions. The rats getting the
glucose had reduced phosphorus in their bones, and more calcium in their
urine, than the rats that got fructose. "The results suggested that glucose
rather than fructose exerted more deleterious effects on mineral balance and
bone" (Tsanzi, et al., 2008).

An older experiment compared two groups with an otherwise well balanced diet,
lacking vitamin D, containing either 68% starch or 68% sucrose. A third group
got the starch diet, but with added vitamin D. The rats on the vitamin D
deficient starch diet had very low levels of calcium in their blood, and the
calcium content of their bones was low, exactly what is expected with the
vitamin D deficiency. However, the rats on the sucrose diet, also vitamin D
deficient, had normal levels of calcium in their blood. The sucrose, unlike
the starch, maintained claim homeostasis. A radioactive calcium tracer showed
normal uptake by the bone, and also apparently normal bone development,
although their bones were lighter than those receiving vitamin D.

People have told me that when they looked for articles on fructose in PubMed
they couldn't find anything except articles about its bad effects. There are
two reasons for that. PubMed, like the earlier Index Medicus, represents the
material in the National Library of Medicine, and is a medical, rather than a
scientific, database, and there is a large amount of important research that
it ignores. And because of the authoritarian and conformist nature of the
medical profession, when a researcher observes something that is contrary to
majority opinion, the title of the publication is unlikely to focus on that.
In too many articles in medical journals, the title and conclusions positively
misrepresent the data reported in the article.

When the idea of "glycemic index" was being popularized by dietitians, it was
already known that starch, consisting of chains of glucose molecules, had a
much higher index than fructose and sucrose. The more rapid appearance of
glucose in the blood stimulates more insulin, and insulin stimulates fat
synthesis, when there is more glucose than can be oxidized immediately. If
starch or glucose is eaten at the same time as polyunsaturated fats, which
inhibit its oxidation, it will produce more fat. Many animal experiments show
this, even when they are intending to show the dangers of fructose and
sucrose.

For example (Thresher, et al., 2000), rats were fed diets with 68%
carbohydrate, 12% fat (corn oil), and 20% protein. In one group the
carbohydrate was starch (cornstarch and maltodextrin, with a glucose
equivalence of 10%), and in other groups it was either 68% sucrose, or 34%
fructose and 34% glucose, or 34% fructose and 34% starch. (An interesting
oddity, fasting triglycerides were highest in the fructose+starch group.)

The weight of their fat pads (epididymal, retroperitoneal, and mesenteric) was
greatest in the fructose+starch group, and least in the sucrose group. The
starch group's fat was intermediate in weight between those of the sucrose and
the fructose+glucose groups.

At the beginning of the experimental diet, the average weight of the animals
was 213.1 grams. After five weeks, the animals in the fructose+glucose group
gained 164 grams, those in the sucrose group gained 177 grams, and those in
the starch group gained 199.2 grams. The animals ate as much of the diet as
they wanted, and those in the sucrose group ate the least.

The purpose of their study was to see whether fructose causes "glucose
intolerance" and "insulin resistance." Since insulin stimulates appetite
(Chance, et al, 1986; Dulloo and Girardier, 1989; Czech, 1988; DiBattista,
1983; Sonoda, 1983; Godbole and York, 1978), and fat synthesis, the reduced
food consumption and reduced weight gain show that fructose was protecting
against these potentially harmful effects of insulin.

Much of the current concern about the dangers of fructose is focussed on the
cornstarch-derived high fructose corn syrup, HFCS. Many studies assume that
its composition is nearly all fructose and glucose. However, Wahjudi, et al.
(2010) analyzed samples of it before and after hydrolyzing it in acid, to
break down other carbohydrates present in it. They found that the carbohydrate
content was several times higher than the listed values. "The underestimation
of carbohydrate content in beverages may be a contributing factor in the
development of obesity in children," and it's especially interesting that so
much of it is present in the form of starch-like materials.

Many people are claiming that fructose consumption has increased greatly in
the last 30 or 40 years, and that this is responsible for the epidemic of
obesity and diabetes. According to the USDA Economic Research Service, the
2007 calorie consumption as flour and cereal products increased 3% from 1970,
while added sugar calories decreased 1%. Calories from meats, eggs, and nuts
decreased 4%, from dairy foods decreased 3%, and calories from added fats
increased 7%. The percentage of calories from fruits and vegetables stayed the
same. The average person consumed 603 calories per day more in 2007 than in
1970. If changes in the national diet are responsible for the increase of
obesity, diabetes, and the diseases associated with them, then it would seem
that the increased consumption of fat and starch is responsible, and that
would be consistent with the known effects of starches and polyunsaturated
fats.

In monkeys living in the wild, when their diet is mainly fruit, their cortisol
is low, and it rises when they eat a diet with less sugar (Behie, et al.,
2010). Sucrose consumption lowers ACTH, the main pituitary stress hormone
(Klement, et al., 2009; Ulrich-Lai, et al., 2007), and stress promotes
increased sugar and fat consumption (Pecoraro, et al., 2004). If animals'
adrenal glands are removed, so that they lack the adrenal steroids, they
choose to consume more sucrose (Laugero, et al., 2001). Stress seems to be
perceived as a need for sugar. In the absence of sucrose, satisfying this need
with starch and fat is more likely to lead to obesity.

The glucocorticoid hormones inhibit the metabolism of sugar. Sugar is
essential for brain development and maintenance. The effects of environmental
stimulation and deprivation-stress can be detected in the thickness of the
brain cortex in as little as 4 days in growing rats (Diamond, et al., 1976).
These effects can persist through a lifetime, and are even passed on
transgenerationally. Experimental evidence shows that polyunsaturated
(omega-3) fats retard fetal brain development, and that sugar promotes it.
These facts argue against some of the currently popular ideas of the evolution
of the human brain based on ancestral diets of fish or meat, which only
matters as far as those anthropological theories are used to argue against
fruits and other sugars in the present diet.

Honey has been used therapeutically for thousands of years, and recently there
has been some research documenting a variety of uses, including treatment of
ulcers and colitis, and other inflammatory conditions. Obesity increases
mediators of inflammation, including the C-reactive protein (CRP) and
homocysteine. Honey, which contains free fructose and free glucose, lowers CRP
and homocysteine, as well as triglycerides, glucose, and cholesterol, while it
increased insulin more than sucrose did (Al-Waili, 2004). Hypoglycemia
intensifies inflammatory reactions, and insulin can reduce inflammation if
sugar is available. Obesity, like diabetes, seems to involve a cellular energy
deficiency, resulting from the inability to metabolize sugar.

Sucrose (and sometimes honey) is increasingly being used to reduce pain in
newborns, for minor things such as injections (Guala, et al., 2001; Okan, et
al., 2007; Anand, et al., 2005; Schoen and Fischell, 1991). It's also
effective in adults. It acts by influencing a variety of nerve systems, and
also reduces stress. Insulin is probably involved in sugar analgesia, as it is
in inflammation, since it promotes entry of endorphins into the brain (Witt,
et al., 2000).

An extracellular phosphorylated fructose metabolite, diphosphoglycerate, has
an essential regulatory effect in the blood; another fructose metabolite,
fructose diphosphate, can reduce mast cell histamine release and protect
against oxidative and hypoxic injury and endotoxic shock, and it reduces the
expression of the inflammation mediators TNF-alpha, IL-6, nitric oxide
synthase, and the activation of NF-kappaB, among other protective effects, and
its therapeutic value is known, but its relation to dietary sugars hasn't been
investigated.

A daily diet that includes two quarts of milk and a quart of orange juice
provides enough fructose and other sugars for general resistance to stress,
but larger amounts of fruit juice, honey, or other sugars can protect against
increased stress, and can reverse some of the established degenerative
conditions.

Refined granulated sugar is extremely pure, but it lacks all of the essential
nutrients, so it should be considered as a temporary therapeutic material, or
as an occasional substitute when good fruit isn't available, or when available
honey is allergenic.

REFERENCES

Anaesthesist 1995 Nov;44(11):770-81. [Fructose vs. glucose in total parenteral
nutrition in critically ill patients] Adolph M, Eckart A, Eckart J.

J Med Food. 2004 Spring;7(1):100-7. Natural honey lowers plasma glucose,
C-reactive protein, homocysteine, and blood lipids in healthy, diabetic, and
hyperlipidemic subjects: comparison with dextrose and sucrose. Al-Waili NS.

Clin Ther. 2005 Jun;27(6):844-76. Analgesia and local anesthesia during
invasive procedures in the neonate. Anand KJ, Johnston CC, Oberlander TF,
Taddio A, Lehr VT, Walco GA.

Ann Nutr Aliment. 1975;29(4):305-12. [Effects of administering diets with
starch or sucrose basis on certain parameters of calcium metabolism in the
young, growing rat] Artus M.

Calcif Tissue Int. 2010 Jul;87(1):60-7. The bone histology spectrum in
experimental renal failure: adverse effects of phosphate and parathyroid
hormone disturbances. Batista DG, Neves KR, Graciolli FG, dos Reis LM,
Graciolli RG, Dominguez WV, Neves CL, MagalhÃ£es AO, CustÃ³dio MR, MoysÃ©s RM,
Jorgetti V.

Am J Primatol. 2010 Jun;72(7):600-6. Sources of variation in fecal cortisol
levels in howler monkeys in Belize. Behie AM, Pavelka MS, Chapman CA.

Am J Hypertens. 2008 Jun;21(6):708-14. Hepatic effects of a fructose diet in
the stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat. Brosnan MJ, Carkner RD.

Am J Physiol. 1993 Apr;264(4 Pt 1):E504-13. Whole body and splanchnic oxygen
consumption and blood flow after oral ingestion of fructose or glucose.
Brundin T, Wahren J. "Compared with glucose, fructose ingestion is accompanied
by a more marked rise in CO2 production, possibly reflecting an increased
extrasplanchnic oxidation of lactate and an accumulation of heat in the body."

Arkansas Academy of Science Proceedings, Vol. 19, 1965, 59- . Effects of
saturated and unsaturated long chain fatty acids fed with and without
essential fatty acid on various components of lipid and carbohydrate
metabolism. Burgess JT.

J. Nutr. 1964; 82: 163-172. -Influences of dietary carohydrate-fat
combinations on various functions associated with glycolysis and lipogenesis
in rats. II. Glucose vs. sucrose with corn oil and two hydrogenated oils.
Carroll C.

Am J Hypertens. 1998;11(5):563-9. Reduction of capillary permeability in the
fructose-induced hypertensive rat. Chakir M, Plante GE, Maheux P.

J Natl Cancer Inst. 1986 Aug;77(2):497-503. Reversal of tumor-induced
biochemical abnormalities by insulin treatment in rats. Chance WT, Muggia-
Sullam M, Chen MH, Murphy RF, Fischer JE.

Physiol Behav. 1988;43(6):765-9. Effect of insulin and 2-deoxy-D-glucose on
feeding and plasma glucose levels in the spiny mouse. Czech DA.

J Neurobiol. 1976 Jan;7(1):75-85. Effects of environment on morphology of rat
cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Diamond MC, Ingham CA, Johnson RE, Bennett
EL, Rosenzweig MR.

Physiol Behav. 1984 Jul;33(1):13-20. Food consumption, plasma glucose and
stomach-emptying in insulin-injected hamsters. DiBattista D.

Am J Physiol. 1989 Oct;257(4 Pt 2):R717-25. Energy expenditure and diet-
induced thermogenesis in presence and absence of hyperphagia induced by
insulin.Dulloo AG, Girardier L.

J Lab Clin Med. 1980 Mar;95(3):373-85. The effect of age on serum
immunoreactive parathyroid hormone in normal and osteoporotic women. Gallagher
JC, Riggs BL, Jerpbak CM, Arnaud CD.

Diabetes Care. 2007 Jun;30(6):1406-11. Orange juice or fructose intake does
not induce oxidative and inflammatory response. Ghanim H, Mohanty P, Pathak R,
Chaudhuri A, Sia CL, Dandona P.

Nutrition. 2005 Feb;21(2):240-8. Changes in lipid metabolism and antioxidant
defense status in spontaneously hypertensive rats and Wistar rats fed a diet
enriched with fructose and saturated fatty acids. Girard A, Madani S, El
Boustani ES, Belleville J, Prost J. "The FS diet resulted in
hypertriglyceridemia but increased the total antioxidant status, which may
prevent lipid peroxidation in these rats."

Diabetologia. 1978 Mar;14(3):191-7. Lipogenesis in situ in the genetically
obese Zucker fatty rat (fa/fa): role of hyperphagia and hyperinsulinaemia.
Godbole V, York DA.

Minerva Pediatr. 2001 Aug;53(4):271-4. Glucose or sucrose as an analgesic for
newborns: a randomised controlled blind trial. Guala A, Pastore G, Liverani
ME, Giroletti G, Gulino E, Meriggi AL, Licardi G, Garipoli V.

Am J Clin Nutr. 1989 Jun;49(6):1290-4. Dietary fructose or starch: effects on
copper, zinc, iron, manganese, calcium, and magnesium balances in
humans.Holbrook JT, Smith JC Jr, Reiser S.

Rinsho Byori 1998;46(10):1003-7. Involvement of tau protein kinase in amyloid-
beta-induced neurodegeneration. Ishiguro K.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005; 90(2):1171-5. Polyol concentrations in the fluid
compartments of the human conceptus during the first trimester of pregnancy:
maintenance of redox potential in a low oxygen environment. Jauniaux E,
Hempstock J, Teng C, Battaglia FC, Burton GJ.

Br J Nutr. 2005 Apr;93(4):485-92. High rates of exogenous carbohydrate
oxidation from a mixture of glucose and fructose ingested during prolonged
cycling exercise. Jentjens RL, Jeukendrup AE. "Furthermore, exogenous CHO
oxidation rates during the last 90 min of exercise were approximately 50%
higher (P<0.05) in GLU+FRUC compared with GLU (1.49 (SE 0.08) and 0.99 (SE
0.06) g/min, respectively)."

Cancer Invest. 2000;18(7):664-9. A medical hypothesis: phosphorus balance and
prostate cancer. Kapur S.

J Lab Clin Med. 1967 Jan;69(1):110-5. Relationship between serum phosphate
concentration and bone resorption in osteoporosis. Kelly PJ, Jowsey J, Riggs
BL, Elveback LR.

J Vet Sci. 2003 Aug;4(2):151-4. Studies on the effects of biomedicinal agents
on serum concentration of Ca2+, P and ALP activity in osteoporosis-induced
rats. Kim SK, Lee MH, Rhee MH.

Metabolism. 2009 Dec;58(12):1825-31. Effects of glucose infusion on
neuroendocrine and cognitive parameters in Addison disease. Klement J, Hubold
C, Hallschmid M, Loeck C, Oltmanns KM, Lehnert H, Born J, Peters A.

Endocrinology. 2001 Jul;142(7):2796-804. Sucrose ingestion normalizes central
expression of corticotropin-releasing-factor messenger ribonucleic acid and
energy balance in adrenalectomized rats: a glucocorticoid-metabolic-brain
axis? Laugero KD, Bell ME, Bhatnagar S, Soriano L, Dallman MF.

Chem Biol Interact. 2011 May 30;191(1-3):308-14. Metabolic mechanisms of
methanol/formaldehyde in isolated rat hepatocytes: carbonyl-metabolizing
enzymes versus oxidative stress. MacAllister SL, Choi J, Dedina L, O'Brien PJ.

Mol Cell Biuochem 2010;341(1-2):149-57. Cytochrome c redox state influences
the binding and release of cytochrome c in model membranes and in brain
mitochondria. Macchioni L, Corazz I, Davidescu M, Francescangeli E, Roberti R,
Corazzi L.

Minerva Endocrinol 1990 Oct-Dec; 15(4):273-7. [Postprandial thermogenesis and
obesity: effects of glucose and fructose]. Macor C, De Palo C, Vettor R,
Sicolo N, De Palo E, Federspil G.

J Am Coll Nutr. 2000 Feb;19(1):31-7. The interaction between dietary fructose
and magnesium adversely affects macromineral homeostasis in men. Milne DB,
Nielsen FH.

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000 Dec;85(12):4515-9. Acute fructose administration
decreases the glycemic response to an oral glucose tolerance test in normal
adults. Moore MC, Cherrington AD, Mann SL, Davis SN.

J Rheumatol. 2003 Apr;30(4):849-50. Acute gout precipitated by total
parenteral nutrition. Moyer RA, John DS.

Chem Biol Interact. 1995 Oct 20;98(1):27-44. Hepatocyte injury resulting from
the inhibition of mitochondrial respiration at low oxygen concentrations
involves reductive stress and oxygen activation. Niknahad H, Khan S, O'Brien
PJ. "Furthermore, increasing the hepatocyte NADH/NAD+ ratio with NADH
generating compounds such as ethanol, glycerol, or beta-hydroxybutyrate
markedly increased cytotoxicity (prevented by desferoxamine) and further
increased the intracellular release of non-heme iron. Cytotoxicity could be
prevented by glycolytic substrates (eg. fructose, dihydroxyacetone,
glyceraldehyde) or the NADH utilising substrates acetoacetate or acetaldehyde
which decreased the reductive stress and prevented intracellular iron
release."

Eur J Pediatr. 2007 Oct;166(10):1017-24. Analgesia in preterm newborns: the
comparative effects of sucrose and glucose. Okan F, Coban A, Ince Z, Yapici Z,
Can G.

Nigerian J. Biochem. Mol Biology 23(1): 12-14, 2008. Depleted blood fructose
in diabetes. Osuagwu CG and Madumere HEO.

Menopause. 2011 Sep 15. Improvement in immediate memory after 16 weeks of
tualang honey (Agro Mas) supplement in healthy postmenopausal women.Othman Z,
Shafin N, Zakaria R, Hussain NH, Mohammad WM.

J Bone Joint Surg Br. 1965 Feb;47:137-9. CHANGES IN SERUM CALCIUM AND
PHOSPHORUS DURING STILBOESTROL TREATMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS. PARFITT AM.

Endocrinology. 2004 Aug;145(8):3754-62. Chronic stress promotes palatable
feeding, which reduces signs of stress: feedforward and feedback effects of
chronic stress. Pecoraro N, Reyes F, Gomez F, Bhargava A, Dallman MF.

Physiol Behav. 2009 Mar 23;96(4-5):651-61. An unexpected reduction in sucrose
concentration activates the HPA axis on successive post shift days without
attenuation by discriminative contextual stimuli. Pecoraro N, de Jong H,
Dallman MF.

Cardiovasc Res 2003;59(4):963-70. Reduction of endothelial NOS and bradykinin-
induced extravastion of macromolecules in skeletal muscle of the fructose-fed
rat model. Plante GE, Perreault M, Lanthier A, Marette A, Maheux P.

Diabetes Metab. 2005 Apr;31(2):178-88. Consumption of carbohydrate solutions
enhances energy intake without increased body weight and impaired insulin
action in rat skeletal muscles. Ruzzin J, Lai YC, Jensen J. "Fructose and
sucrose solutions enhanced energy intake but did not increase body weight."

Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1991 Jul;30(7):429-32. Pain in neonatal circumcision.
Schoen EJ, Fischell AA.

J. Clin Invest. 1988; 81:1137-1145. Ethanol causes acute inhibition of
carbohydrate, fat, and protein oxidation and insulin resistance, Shelmet JJ,
Reichard GA, Skutches CL, Hoeldtke RD, Owen OE, and Boden G.

J Appl Physiol. 1987 Aug;63(2):465-70. Regulatory alterations of daily energy
expenditure induced by fasting or overfeeding in unrestrained rats. Shibata H,
Bukowiecki LJ.

"O2 consumption decreased by 15% on the 1st day of fasting and then by an
additional 15% on the 2nd day. On the 3rd day, when rats were fed again,
energy intake increased by 30% above control (prefasting) values, whereas
energy expenditure rapidly increased but no more than control values. On the
other hand, when ad libitum fed animals were offered a sucrose solution (32%)
for 2 days, energy intake increased by 30% and energy expenditure by 9-12%. On
the 3rd day, when the rats were fed with their normal diet, energy intake
significantly decreased under control (preoverfeeding) values during one day,
but energy expenditure rapidly returned to normal values. The results show
that fasting decreases, whereas hyperphagia increases 24-h energy expenditure
during the treatments."

Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Jun;288(6):E1160-7. Inclusion of low
amounts of fructose with an intraportal glucose load increases net hepatic
glucose uptake in the presence of relative insulin deficiency in dog. Shiota
M, Galassetti P, Igawa K, Neal DW, Cherrington AD.

Physiol Behav. 1983 Mar;30(3):325-9. Hyperinsulinemia and its role in
maintaining the hypothalamic hyperphagia in chickens. Sonoda T.

Carbohydr Res. 2009 Sep 8;344(13):1676-81. Protective role of fructose in the
metabolism of astroglial C6 cells exposed to hydrogen peroxide. SpasojeviÄ I,
BajiÄ A, JovanoviÄ K, SpasiÄ M, Andjus P.

Arthritis Res Ther 2008; 10(5);224. Vascular involvement in rheumatic
diseases: 'vascular rheumatology.' Szekanecz Z, Koch AE.

Am J Clin Nutr 1993 Nov;58(5 Suppl):766S-770S. Fructose and dietary
thermogenesis. Tappy L, Jequier E.

Biochem J 1967;102(1):177-80. The influence of fructose and its metabolites on
ethanol metabolism in vitro. Thieden HI and Lundquist F. "without ethanol...
fructose strongly increased the pyruvate concentrtion, which resulted in a
decrease of the lactate/pyruvate concentration

Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2000 Oct;279(4):R1334-40. Comparison
of the effects of sucrose and fructose on insulin action and glucose
tolerance.Thresher JS, Podolin DA, Wei Y, Mazzeo RS, Pagliassotti MJ.

Bone. 2008 May;42(5):960-8. The effect of feeding different sugar-sweetened
beverages to growing female Sprague-Dawley rats on bone mass and strength.
Tsanzi E, Light HR, Tou JC.

Microcirculation 2003;10(6);463-70. Blood-brain barrier permeability precedes
senile plaque formation in an Alzheimer disease model. Ujiie M, Dickstein DL,
Carlow DA, Jefferies WA.

Physiol Behav. 2011 Apr 18;103(1):104-10. HPA axis dampening by limited
sucrose intake: reward frequency vs. caloric consumption. Ulrich-Lai YM,
Ostrander MM, Herman JP.

Am J Physiol. 1986 Jun;250(6 Pt 1):E607-14. Synergistic improvement of glucose
tolerance by sucrose feeding and exercise training. Vallerand AL, Lupien J,
Bukowiecki LJ.

Diabete Metab. 1984 Sep;10(3):206-10. [Plasma glucose and C-peptide after
ingestion of sucrose and starch in controlled insulin-dependent diabetics.
Importance of glucose availability]. Villaume C, Rousselle D, Mejean L, Beck
B, Drouin P, Debry G.

Journal of the American Medical Association November 10, 2010; Carbohydrate
Analysis of High Fructose Corn Syrup (HFCS) Containing Commercial Beverages.
Wahjudi PN, Hsieh E, Mary E Patterson ME, Catherine S Mao CS, Lee WNP.

Clin Sci (Lond). 2003 Jun 12. Uric acid reduces exercise-induced oxidative
stress in healthy adults. Waring WS, Convery AA, Mishra V, Shenkin A, Webb DJ,
Maxwell SR.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000 Dec;295(3):972-8. Insulin enhancement of opioid
peptide transport across the blood-brain barrier and assessment of analgesic
effect.Witt KA, Huber JD, Egleton RD, Davis TP.

Life Sci. 1983 Jul 4;33(1):75-82. Serum lipids and cholesterol distribution in
lipoproteins of exercise-trained female rats fed sucrose. Deshaies Y,
Vallerand AL, Bukowiecki LJ.

Am J Physiol. 1983 Apr;244(4):R500-7. Effects of sucrose, caffeine, and cola
beverages on obesity, cold resistance, and adipose tissue cellularity.
Bukowiecki LJ, Lupien J, FollÃ©a N, Jahjah L.

Am J Physiol 1987 Sep;253(3 Pt 1):G390-6. Fructose prevents hypoxic cell death
in liver. Anundi I, King J, Owen DA, Schneider H, Lemasters JJ, Thurman RG.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2012. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

