![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Progesterone Pregnenolone & DHEA - Three Youth-Associated Hormones**  

**PROGESTERONE INFORMATION**  

Raymond Peat, MA, PhD (Univ. of Oregon)

Endocrine Physiologist, specializing in hormonal changes in stress and aging  

Sixty years ago, progesterone was found to be the main hormone produced by the
ovaries. Since it was necessary for fertility and for maintaining a healthy
pregnancy, it was called the "pro-gestational hormone," and its name sometimes
leads people to think that it isn't needed when you don't want to get
pregnant. In fact, it is the most protective hormone the body produces, and
the large amounts that are produced during pregnancy result from the
developing baby's need for protection from the stressful environment.
Normally, the brain contains a very high concentration of progesterone,
reflecting its protective function for that most important organ. The thymus
gland, the key organ of our immune system, is also profoundly dependent on
progesterone.  

In experiments, progesterone was found to be the basic hormone of adaptation
and of resistance to stress. The adrenal glands use it to produce their anti-
stress hormones, and when there is enough progesterone, they don't have to
produce the potentially harmful cortisone. In a progesterone deficiency, we
produce too much cortisone, and excessive cortisone causes osteoporosis, aging
of the skin, damage to brain cells, and the accumulation of fat, especially on
the back and abdomen.  

Experiments have shown that progesterone relieves anxiety, improves memory,
protects brain cells, and even prevents epileptic seizures. It promotes
respiration, and has been used to correct emphysema. In the circulatory
system, it prevents bulging veins by increasing the tone of blood vessels, and
improves the efficiency of the heart. It reverses many of the signs of aging
in the skin, and promotes healthy bone growth. It can relieve many types of
arthritis, and helps a variety of immunological problems.  

If progesterone is taken dissolved in vitamin E, it is absorbed very
efficiently, and distributed quickly to all of the tissues. If a woman has
ovaries, progesterone helps them to produce both progesterone and estrogen as
needed, and also helps to restore normal functioning of the thyroid and other
glands. If her ovaries have been removed, progesterone should be taken
consistently to replace the lost supply. A progesterone deficiency has often
been associated with increased susceptibility to cancer, and progesterone has
been used to treat some types of cancer.  

It is important to emphasize that progesterone is not just the hormone of
pregnancy. To use it only "to protect the uterus" would be like telling a man
he doesn't need testosterone if he doesn't plan to father children, except
that progesterone is of far greater and more basic significance than
testosterone. While men do naturally produce progesterone, and can sometimes
benefit from using it, it is not a male hormone. Some people get that
impression, because some physicians recommend combining estrogen with either
testosterone or progesterone, to protect against some of estrogen's side
effects, but progesterone is the body's natural complement to estrogen. Used
alone, progesterone often makes it unnecessary to use estrogen for hot flashes
or insomnia, or other symptoms of menopause.  

When dissolved in vitamin E, progesterone begins entering the blood stream
almost as soon as it contacts any membrane, such as the lips, tongue, gums, or
palate, but when it is swallowed, it continues to be absorbed as part of the
digestive process. When taken with food, its absorption occurs at the same
rate as the digestion and absorption of the food.  
  

**PREGNENOLONE**  

Pregnenolone, which is the raw material for producing many of the hormones of
stress and adaptation, was known as early as 1934, but for several years it
was considered to be an "inert" substance. A reason for this belief is that it
was first tested on healthy young animals. Since these animals were already
producing large amounts of pregnenolone (in the brain, adrenal glands, and
gonads), additional pregnenolone had no effect.  

In the 1940s, pregnenolone was tested in people who were sick or under stress,
and it was found to have a wide range of beneficial actions, but the drug
industry never had much interest in it. Its very generality made it seem
unlike a drug, and its natural occurrence made it impossible to patent. Thus,
many synthetic variants, each with a more specialized action and some serious
side effects, came to be patented and promoted for use in treating specific
conditions. The drug companies created an atmosphere in which many people felt
that each disease should have a drug, and each drug, a disease. The side
effects of some of those synthetic hormones were so awful that many people
came to fear them. For example, synthetic varieties of "cortisone" can destroy
immunity, and can cause osteoporosis, diabetes, and rapid aging, with loss of
pigment in the skin and hair, and extreme thinning of the skin.  

Natural pregnenolone is present in young people of both sexes at a very high
concentration, and one reason for the large amount produced in youth is that
it is one of our basic defenses against the harmful side effects that an
imbalance of even our natural hormones can produce. In excess, natural
cortisone or estrogen can be dangerous, but when there is an abundance of
pregnenolone, their side effects are prevented or minimized.  

In a healthy young person or animal, taking even a large dose of pregnenolone
has no hormone-like or drug-like action at all. It is unique in this way. But
if the animal or person is under stress, and producing more cortisone than
usual, taking pregnenolone causes the cortisone to come down to the normal
level. After the age of 40 or 45, it seems that everyone lives in a state of
continuous "stress," just as a normal part of aging. This coincides with the
body's decreased ability to produce an abundance of pregnenolone.  

When aging rats are given a supplement of pregnenolone, it immediately
improves their memory and general performance. Human studies, as early as the
1940s, have also demonstrated improved performance of ordinary tasks. It is
now known that pregnenolone is one of the major hormones in the brain. It is
produced by certain brain cells, as well as being absorbed into the brain from
the blood. It protects brain cells from injury caused by fatigue, and an
adequate amount has a calming effect on the emotions, which is part of the
reason that it protects us from the stress response that leads to an excessive
production of cortisone. People feel a mood of resilience and an ability to
confront challenges.  

Many people have noticed that pregnenolone has a "face-lifting" action. This
effect seems to be produced by improved circulation to the skin, and by an
actual contraction of some muscle-like cells in the skin. A similar effect can
improve joint mobility in arthritis, tissue elasticity in the lungs, and even
eyesight. Many studies have shown it to be protective of "fibrous tissues" in
general, and in this connection it was proven to prevent the tumors that can
be caused by estrogen.  

Pregnenolone is largely converted into two other "youth-associated" protective
hormones, progesterone and DHEA. At the age of 30, both men and women produce
roughly 30 to 50 mg. of pregnenolone daily. When taken orally, even in the
powdered form, it is absorbed fairly well. One dose of approximately 300 mg
(the size of an aspirin tablet) keeps acting for about a week, as absorption
continues along the intestine, and as it is "recycled" in the body. Part of
this long lasting effect is because it improves the body's ability to produce
its own pregnenolone. It tends to improve function of the thyroid and other
glands, and this "normalizing" effect on the other glands helps to account for
its wide range of beneficial effects.  
  

**DHEA: ANOTHER YOUTH-ASSOCIATED HORMONE**  

Raymond Peat, MA, PhD (Univ. of Oregon)

Endocrine Physiologist  

DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone) has a technical-sounding name because it has
never been identified with a single dominant function, in spite of its
abundance in the body. Many researchers still think of it as a substance
produced by the adrenal glands, but experiments show that animals without
adrenals are able to produce it in normal amounts. Much of it is formed in the
brain (from pregnenolone), but it is probably produced in other organs,
including the skin. The brain contains a much higher concentration of DHEA
than the blood does.

In old age, we produce only about 5% as much as we do in youth. This is about
the same decrease that occurs with progesterone and pregnenolone. The other
hormones (for example, cortisone) do not decrease so much; as a result, our
balance shifts continually during aging toward dominance by hormones such as
cortisone, which use up more and more body substance, without rebuilding it.
Protection against the toxic actions of these specialized hormones is a major
function of DHEA and the other youth-associated hormones.

For example, starvation, aging, and stress cause the skin to become thin and
fragile. An excess of cortisone--whether it is from medical treatment, or from
stress, aging, or malnutrition--does the same thing. Material from the skin is
dissolved to provide nutrition for the more essential organs. Other organs,
such as the muscles and bones, dissolve more slowly, but just as
destructively, under the continued influence of cortisone. DHEA blocks these
destructive effects of cortisone, and actively restores the normal growth and
repair processes to those organs, strengthening the skin and bones and other
organs. Stimulation of bone-growth by DHEA has been demonstrated in vitro (in
laboratory tests), and it has been used to relieve many symptoms caused by
osteoporosis and arthritis, even when applied topically in an oily solution.

Estrogen is known to produce a great variety of immunological defects, and
DHEA, apparently by its balancing and restorative actions, is able to correct
some of those immunological defects, including some "autoimmune" diseases.

It is established that DHEA protects against cancer, but it isn't yet
understood how it does this. It appears to protect against the toxic cancer-
producing effects of excess estrogen, but its anti-cancer properties probably
involve many other functions.

Diabetes can be produced experimentally by certain poisons which kill the
insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. Rabbits were experimentally made
diabetic, and when treated with DHEA their diabetes was cured. It was found
that the insulin-producing cells had regenerated. Many people with diabetes
have used brewer's yeast and DHEA to improve their sugar metabolism. In
diabetes, very little sugar enters the cells, so fatigue is a problem. DHEA
stimulates cells to absorb sugar and to burn it, so it increases our general
energy level and helps to prevent obesity.

Young people produce about 12 to 15 milligrams of DHEA per day, and that
amount decreases by about 2 mg. per day for every decade after the age of 30.
This is one of the reasons that young people eat more without getting fat, and
tolerate cold weather better: DHEA, like the thyroid hormone, increases our
heat production and ability to burn calories. At the age of 50, about 4 mg. of
DHEA per day will usually restore the level of DHEA in the blood to a youthful
level. It is important to avoid taking more than needed, since some people
(especially if they are deficient in progesterone, pregnenolone, or thyroid)
can turn the excess into estrogen or testosterone, and large amounts of those
sex hormones can disturb the function of the thymus gland and the liver.

People who have taken an excess of DHEA have been found to have abnormally
high estrogen levels, and this can cause the liver to enlarge, and the thymus
to shrink.

One study has found that the only hormone abnormality in a groupt of
Alzheimers patients' brains was an excess of DHEA. In cell culture, DHEA can
cause changes in glial cells resembling those seen in the aging brain. These
observations suggest that DHEA should be used with caution. Supplements of
pregnenolone and thyroid seem to be the safest way to optimize DHEA
production.  

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

