![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Thyroid: Therapies, Confusion, and Fraud**  
  
I. Respiratory-metabolic defect  
  
II. 50 years of commercially motivated fraud  
  
III. Tests and the "free hormone hypothesis"  
  
IV. Events in the tissues  
  
V. Therapies  
  
VI. Diagnosis  
  
**I. Respiratory defect**  
  
Broda Barnes, more than 60 years ago, summed up the major effects of
hypothyroidism on health very neatly when he pointed out that if hypothyroid
people don't die young from infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, they
die a little later from cancer or heart disease. He did his PhD research at
the University of Chicago, just a few years after Otto Warburg, in Germany,
had demonstrated the role of a "respiratory defect" in cancer. At the time
Barnes was doing his research, hypothyroidism was diagnosed on the basis of a
low basal metabolic rate, meaning that only a small amount of oxygen was
needed to sustain life. This deficiency of oxygen consumption involved the
same enzyme system that Warburg was studying in cancer cells.  
  
Barnes experimented on rabbits, and found that when their thyroid glands were
removed, they developed atherosclerosis, just as hypothyroid people did. By
the mid-1930s, it was generally known that hypothyroidism causes the
cholesterol level in the blood to increase; hypercholesterolemia was a
diagnostic sign of hypothyroidism. Administering a thyroid supplement, blood
cholesterol came down to normal exactly as the basal metabolic rate came up to
the normal rate. The biology of atherosclerotic heart disease was basically
solved before the second world war.  
  
Many other diseases are now known to be caused by respiratory defects.
Inflammation, stress, immunodeficiency, autoimmunity, developmental and
degenerative diseases, and aging, all involve significantly abnormal oxidative
processes. Just brief oxygen deprivation triggers processes that lead to lipid
peroxidation, producing a chain of other oxidative reactions when oxygen is
restored. The only effective way to stop lipid peroxidation is to restore
normal respiration.  
  
Now that dozens of diseases are known to involve defective respiration, the
idea of thyroid's extremely broad range of actions is becoming easier to
accept.  
  
**II. 50 years of fraud**  
  
Until the second world war, hypothyroidism was diagnosed on the basis of BMR
(basal metabolic rate) and a large group of signs and symptoms. In the late
1940s, promotion of the (biologically inappropriate) PBI (protein-bound
iodine) blood test in the U.S. led to the concept that only 5% of the
population were hypothyroid, and that the 40% identified by "obsolete" methods
were either normal, or suffered from other problems such as sloth and
gluttony, or "genetic susceptibility" to disease. During the same period,
thyroxine became available, and in healthy young men it acted "like the
thyroid hormone." Older practitioners recognized that it was not metabolically
the same as the traditional thyroid substance, especially for women and
seriously hypothyroid patients, but marketing, and its influence on medical
education, led to the false idea that the standard Armour thyroid USP wasn't
properly standardized, and that certain thyroxine products were; despite the
fact that both of these were shown to be false.  
  
By the 1960s, the PBI test was proven to be irrelevant to the diagnosis of
hypothyroidism, but the doctrine of 5% hypothyroidism in the populaton became
the basis for establishing the norms for biologically meaningful tests when
they were introduced.  
  
Meanwhile, the practice of measuring serum iodine, and equating it with
"thyroxine the thyroid hormone," led to the practice of examining only the
iodine content of the putative glandular material that was offered for sale as
thyroid USP. This led to the substitution of materials such as iodinated
casein for desiccated thyroid in the products sold as thyroid USP. The US FDA
refused to take action, because they held that a material's iodine content was
enough to identify it as "thyroid USP." In this culture of misunderstanding
and misrepresentation, the mistaken idea of hypothyroidism's low incidence in
the population led to the acceptance of dangerously high TSH (thyroid
stimulating hormone) activity as "normal." Just as excessive FSH (follicle
stimulating hormone) has been shown to have a role in ovarian cancer,
excessive stimulation by TSH produces disorganization in the thyroid gland.  
  
**III. Tests & the "free hormone hypothesis"**  
  
After radioactive iodine became available, many physicians would administer a
dose, and then scan the body with a Geiger counter, to see if it was being
concentrated in the thyroid gland. If a person had been eating iodine-rich
food (and iodine was used in bread as a preservative/dough condition, and was
present in other foods as an accidental contaminant), they would already be
over saturated with iodine, and the gland would fail to concentrate the
iodine. The test can find some types of metastatic thyroid cancer, but the
test generally wasn't used for that purpose. Another expensive and
entertaining test has been the thyrotropin release hormone (TRH) test, to see
if the pituitary responds to it by increasing TSH production. A recent study
concluded that "TRH test gives many misleading results and has an elevated
cost/benefit ratio as compared with the characteristic combination of low
thyroxinemia and non-elevated TSH." (Bakiri, Ann. Endocr (Paris) 1999), but
the technological drama, cost, and danger (Dokmetas, et al., J Endocrinol
Invest 1999 Oct; 22(9): 698-700) of this test is going to make it stay popular
for a long time. If the special value of the test is to diagnose a pituitary
abnormality, it seems intuitively obvious that overstimulating the pituitary
might not be a good idea (e.g., it could cause a tumor to grow).  
  
Everything else being equal, as they say, looking at the amount of thyroxine
and TSH in the blood can be informative. The problem is that it's just a
matter of faith that "everything else" is going to be equal. The exceptions to
the "rule" regarding normal ranges for thyroxine and TSH have formed the basis
for some theories about "the genetics of thyroid resistance," but others have
pointed out that, when a few other things are taken into account, abnormal
numbers for T4, T3, TSH, can be variously explained.  
  
The actual quantity of T3, the active thyroid hormone, in the blood can be
measured with reasonable accuracy (using radioimmunoassay, RIA), and this
single test corresponds better to the metabolic rate and other meaningful
biological responses than other standard tests do. But still, this is only a
statistical correspondence, and it doesn't indicate that any particular number
is right for a particular individual.  
  
Sometimes, a test called the RT3U, or resin T3 uptake, is used, along with a
measurement of thyroxine. A certain amount of radioactive T3 is added to a
sample of serum, and then an adsorbent material is exposed to the mixture of
serum and radioactive T3. The amount of radioactivity that sticks to the resin
is called the T3 uptake. The lab report then gives a number called T7, or free
thyroxine index. The closer this procedure is examined, the sillier it looks,
and it looks pretty silly on its face.. The idea that the added radioactive T3
that sticks to a piece of resin will correspond to "free thyroxine," is in
itself odd, but the really interesting question is, what do they mean by "free
thyroxine"? Thyroxine is a fairly hydrophobic (insoluble in water) substance,
that will associate with proteins, cells, and lipoproteins in the blood,
rather than dissolving in the water. Although the Merck Index describes it as
"insoluble in water," it does contain some polar groups that, in the right
(industrial or laboratory) conditions, can make it slightly water soluble.
This makes it a little different from progesterone, which is simply and
thoroughly insoluble in water, though the term "free hormone" is often applied
to progesterone, as it is to thyroid. In the case of progesterone, the term
"free progesterone" can be traced to experiments in which serum containing
progesterone (bound to proteins) is separated by a (dialysis) membrane from a
solution of similar proteins which contain no progesterone. Progesterone
"dissolves in" the substance of the membrane, and the serum proteins, which
also tend to associate with the membrane, are so large that they don't pass
through it. On the other side, proteins coming in contact with the membrane
pick up some progesterone. The progesterone that passes through is called
"free progesterone," but from that experiment, which gives no information on
the nature of the interactions between progesterone and the dialysis membrane,
or about its interactions with the proteins, or the proteins' interactions
with the membrane, nothing is revealed about the reasons for the transmission
or exchange of a certain amount of progesterone. Nevertheless, that type of
experiment is used to interpret what happens in the body, where there is
nothing that corresponds to the experimental set-up, except that some
progesterone is associated with some protein.  
  
The idea that the "free hormone" is the active form has been tested in a few
situations, and in the case of the thyroid hormone, it is clearly not true for
the brain, and some other organs. The protein-bound hormone is, in these
cases, the active form; the associations between the "free hormone" and the
biological processes and diseases will be completely false, if they are
ignoring the active forms of the hormone in favor of the less active forms.
The conclusions will be false, as they are when T4 is measured, and T3
ignored. Thyroid-dependent processes will appear to be independent of the
level of thyroid hormone; hypothyroidism could be caller hyperthyroidism.  
  
Although progesterone is more fat soluble than cortisol and the thyroid
hormones, the behavior of progesterone in the blood illustrates some of the
problems that have to be considered for interpreting thyroid physiology. When
red cells are broken up, they are found to contain progesterone at about twice
the concentration of the serum. In the serum, 40 to 80% of the progesterone is
probably carried on albumin. (Albumin easily delivers its progesterone load
into tissues.) Progesterone, like cholesterol, can be carried on/in the
lipoproteins, in moderate quantities. This leaves a very small fraction to be
bound to the "steroid binding globulin." Anyone who has tried to dissolve
progesterone in various solvents and mixtures knows that it takes just a tiny
amount of water in a solvent to make progesterone precipitate from solution as
crystals; its solubility in water is essentially zero. "Free" progesterone
would seem to mean progesterone not attached to proteins or dissolved in red
blood cells or lipoproteins, and this would be zero. The tests that purport to
measure free progesterone are measuring something, but not the progesterone in
the watery fraction of the serum.  
  
The thyroid hormones associate with three types of simple proteins in the
serum: Transthyretin (prealbumin), thyroid binding globulin, and albumin. A
very significant amount is also associated with various serum lipoproteins,
including HDL, LDL, and VLDL (very low density lipoproteins). A very large
portion of the thyroid in the blood is associated with the red blood cells.
When red cells were incubated in a medium containing serum albumin, with the
cells at roughly the concentration found in the blood, they retained T3 at a
concentration 13.5 times higher than that of the medium. In a larger amount of
medium, their concentration of T3 was 50 times higher than the medium's. When
laboratories measure the hormones in the serum only, they have already thrown
out about 95% of the thyroid hormone that the blood contained.  
  
The T3 was found to be strongly associated with the cells' cytoplasmic
proteins, but to move rapidly between the proteins inside the cells and other
proteins outside the cells.  
  
When people speak of hormones travelling "on" the red blood cells, rather than
"in" them, it is a concession to the doctrine of the impenetrable membrane
barrier.  
  
Much more T3 bound to albumin is taken up by the liver than the small amount
identified in vitro as free T3 (Terasaki, et al., 1987). The specific binding
of T3 to albumin alters the protein's electrical properties, changing the way
the albumin interacts with cells and other proteins. (Albumin becomes
electrically more positive when it binds the hormone; this would make the
albumin enter cells more easily. Giving up its T3 to the cell, it would become
more negative, making it tend to leave the cell.) This active role of albumin
in helping cells take up T3 might account for its increased uptake by the red
cells when there were fewer cells in proportion to the albumin medium. This
could also account for the favorable prognosis associated with higher levels
of serum albumin in various sicknesses.  
  
When T3 is attached chemically (covalently, permanently) to the outside of red
blood cells, apparently preventing its entry into other cells, the presence of
these red cells produces reactions in other cells that are the same as some of
those produced by the supposedly "free hormone." If T3 attached to whole cells
can exert its hormonal action, why should we think of the hormone bound to
proteins as being unable to affect cells? The idea of measuring the "free
hormone" is that it supposedly represents the biologically active hormone, but
in fact it is easier to measure the biological effects than it is to measure
this hypothetical entity. Who cares how many angels might be dancing on the
head of a pin, if the pin is effective in keeping your shirt closed?  
  
**IV. Events in the tissues**  
  
Besides the effects of commercial deception, confusion about thyroid has
resulted from some biological clichés. The idea of a "barrier membrane" around
cells is an assumption that has affected most people studying cell physiology,
and its effects can be seen in nearly all of the thousands of publications on
the functions of thyroid hormones. According to this idea, people have
described a cell as resembling a droplet of a watery solution, enclosed in an
oily bag which separates the internal solution from the external watery
solution. The cliché is sustained only by neglecting the fact that proteins
have a great affinity for fats, and fats for proteins; even soluble proteins,
such as serum albumin, often have interiors that are extremely fat-loving.
Since the structural proteins that make up the framework of a cell aren't
"dissolved in water" (they used to be called "the insoluble proteins"), the
lipophilic phase isn't limited to an ultramicroscopically thin surface, but
actually constitutes the bulk of the cell.  
  
Molecular geneticists like to trace their science from a 1944 experiment that
was done by Avery., et al. Avery's group knew about an earlier experiment,
that had demonstrated that when dead bacteria were added to living bacteria,
the traits of the dead bacteria appeared in the living bacteria. Avery's group
extracted DNA from the dead bacteria, and showed that adding it to living
bacteria transferred the traits of the dead organisms to the living.  
  
In the 1930s and 1940s, the movement of huge molecules such as proteins and
nucleic acids into cells and out of cells wasn't a big deal; people observed
it happening, and wrote about it. But in the 1940s the idea of the barrier
membrane began gaining strength, and by the 1960s nothing was able to get into
cells without authorization. At present, I doubt that any molecular geneticist
would dream of doing a gene transplant without a "vector" to carry it across
the membrane barrier.  
  
Since big molecules are supposed to be excluded from cells, it's only the
"free hormone" which can find its specific port of entry into the cell, where
another cliché says it must travel into the nucleus, to react with a specific
site to activate the specific genes through which its effects will be
expressed.  
  
I don't know of any hormone that acts that way. Thyroid, progesterone, and
estrogen have many immediate effects that change the cell's functions long
before genes could be activated.  
  
Transthyretin, carrying the thyroid hormone, enters the cell's mitochondria
and nucleus (Azimova, et al., 1984, 1985). In the nucleus, it immediately
causes generalized changes in the structure of chromosomes, as if preparing
the cell for major adaptive changes. Respiratory activation is immediate in
the mitochondria, but as respiration is stimulated, everything in the cell
responds, including the genes that support respiratory metabolism. When the
membrane people have to talk about the entry of large molecules into cells,
they use terms such as "endocytosis" and "translocases," that incorporate the
assumption of the barrier. But people who actually investigate the problem
generally find that "diffusion," "codiffusion," and absorption describe the
situation adequately (e.g., B.A. Luxon, 1997; McLeese and Eales, 1996).
"Active transport" and "membrane pumps" are ideas that seem necessary to
people who haven't studied the complex forces that operate at phase
boundaries, such as the boundary between a cell and its environment.  
  
**V. Therapy**  
  
Years ago it was reported that Armour thyroid, U.S.P., released T3 and T4,
when digested, in a ratio of 1:3, and that people who used it had much higher
ratios of T3 to T4 in their serum, than people who took only thyroxine. The
argument was made that thyroxine was superior to thyroid U.S.P., without
explaining the significance of the fact that healthy people who weren't taking
any thyroid supplement had higher T3:T4 ratios than the people who took
thyroxine, or that our own thyroid gland releases a high ratio of T3 to T4.
The fact that the T3 is being used faster than T4, removing it from the blood
more quickly than it enters from the thyroid gland itself, hasn't been
discussed in the journals, possibly because it would support the view that a
natural glandular balance was more appropriate to supplement than pure
thyroxine.  
  
The serum's high ratio of T4 to T3 is a pitifully poor argument to justify the
use of thyroxine instead of a product that resembles the proportion of these
substances secreted by a healthy thyroid gland, or maintained inside cells.
About 30 years ago, when many people still thought of thyroxine as "the
thryoid hormone," someone was making the argument that "the thyroid hormone"
must work exclusively as an activator of genes, since most of the organ slices
he tested didn't increase their oxygen consumption when it was added. In fact,
the addition of thyroxine to brain slices suppressed their respiration by 6%
during the experiment. Since most T3 is produced from T4 in the liver, not in
the brain, I think that experiment had great significance, despite the
ignorant interpretation of the author. An excess of thyroxine, in a tissue
that doesn't convert it rapidly to T3, has an antithyroid action. (See Goumaz,
et al, 1987.) This happens in many women who are given thyroxine; as their
dose is increased, their symptoms get worse.  
  
The brain concentrates T3 from the serum, and may have a concentration 6 times
higher than the serum (Goumaz, et al., 1987), and it can achieve a higher
concentration of T3 than T4. It takes up and concentrates T3, while tending to
expel T4. Reverse T3 (rT3) doesn't have much ability to enter the brain, but
increased T4 can cause it to be produced in the brain. These observations
suggest to me that the blood's T3:T4 ratio would be very "brain favorable" if
it approached more closely to the ratio formed in the thyroid gland, and
secreted into the blood. Although most synthetic combination thyroid products
now use a ratio of four T4 to one T3, many people feel that their memory and
thinking are clearer when they take a ratio of about three to one. More active
metabolism probably keeps the blood ratio of T3 to T4 relatively high, with
the liver consuming T4 at about the same rate that T3 is used.  
  
Since T3 has a short half life, it should be taken frequently. If the liver
isn't producing a noticeable amount of T3, it is usually helpful to take a few
micorgrams per hour. Since it restores respiration and metabolic efficiency
very quickly, it isn't usually necessary to take it every hour or two, but
until normal temperature and pulse have been achieved and stabilized,
sometimes it's necessary to take it four or more times during the day. T4 acts
by being changed to T3, so it tends to accumulate in the body, and on a given
dose, usually reaches a steady concentration after about two weeks.  
  
An effective way to use supplements is to take a combination T4-T3 dose, e.g.,
40 mcg of T4 and 10 mcg of T3 once a day, and to use a few mcg of T3 at other
times in the day. Keeping a 14-day chart of pulse rate and temperature allows
you to see whether the dose is producing the desired response. If the figures
aren't increasing at all after a few days, the dose can be increased, until a
gradual daily increment can be seen, moving toward the goal at the rate of
about 1/14 per day  
  
**VI. Diagnosis**  
  
In the absence of commercial techniques that reflect thyroid physiology
realistically, there is no valid alternative to diagnosis based on the known
physiological indicators of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. The failure to
treat sick people because of one or another blood test that indicates "normal
thyroid function," or the destruction of patients' healthy thyroid glands
because one of the tests indicates hyperthyroidism, isn't acceptable just
because it's the professional standard, and is enforced by benighted state
licensing boards.  
  
Toward the end of the twentieth century, there has been considerable
discussion of "evidence-based medicine." Good judgment requires good
information, but there are forces that would over-rule individual judgment as
to whether published information is applicable to certain patients. In an
atmosphere that sanctions prescribing estrogen or insulin without evidence of
an estrogen deficiency or insulin deficiency, but that penalizes practitioners
who prescribe thyroid to correct symptoms, the published "evidence" is
necessarily heavily biased. In this context, "meta-analysis" becomes a tool of
authoritarianism, replacing the use of judgment with the improper use of
statistical analysis.  
  
Unless someone can demonstrate the scientific invalidity of the methods used
to diagnose hypothyroidism up to 1945, then they constitute the best present
evidence for evaluating hypothyroidism, because all of the blood tests that
have been used since 1950 have been.shown to be, at best, very crude and
conceptually inappropriate methods.  
  
Thomas H. McGavack's 1951 book, The Thyroid, was representative of the earlier
approach to the study of thyroid physiology. Familiarity with the different
effects of abnormal thyroid function under different conditions, at different
ages, and the effects of gender, were standard parts of medical education that
had disappeared by the end of the century. Arthritis, irregularities of
growth, wasting, obesity, a variety of abnormalities of the hair and skin,
carotenemia, amenorrhea, tendency to miscarry, infertility in males and
females, insomnia or somnolence, emphysema, various heart diseases, psychosis,
dementia, poor memory, anxiety, cold extremities, anemia, and many other
problems were known reasons to suspect hypothyroidism. If the physician didn't
have a device for measuring oxygen consumption, estimated calorie intake could
provide supporting evidence. The Achilles' tendon reflex was another simple
objective measurement with a very strong correlation to the basal metabolic
rate. Skin electrical resistance, or whole body impedance wasn't widely
accepted, though it had considerable scientific validity.  
  
A therapeutic trial was the final test of the validity of the diagnosis: If
the patient's symptoms disappeared as his temperature and pulse rate and food
intake were normalized, the diagnostic hypothesis was confirmed. It was common
to begin therapy with one or two grains of thyroid, and to adjust the dose
according to the patient's response. Whatever objective indicator was used,
whether it was basal metabolic rate, or serum cholesterol. or core
temperature, or reflex relaxation rate, a simple chart would graphically
indicate the rate of recovery toward normal health.  
  
**REFERENCES**  
  
McGavack, Thomas Hodge.: The thyroid,: St. Louis, Mosby, 1951. 646 p.
ill.Several chapters contributed by various authors.Call Numbers WK200 M145t
1951 (Rare Book).  
  
Endocrinology 1979 Sep; 105(3): 605-12. Carrier-mediated transport of thyroid
hormones through the rat blood-brain barrier: primary role of albumin-bound
hormone. Pardridge WM.  
  
Endocrinology 1987 Apr;120(4):1590-6. Brain cortex reverse triiodothyronine
(rT3) and triiodothyronine concentrations under steady state infusions of
thyroxine and rT3. Goumaz MO, Kaiser CA, Burger A.G.  
  
J Clin Invest 1984 Sep;74(3):745-52. Tracer kinetic model of blood-brain
barrier transport of plasma protein-bound ligands. Empiric testing of the free
hormone hypothesis. Pardridge WM, Landaw EM. Previous studies have shown that
the fraction of hormone or drug that is plasma protein bound is readily
available for transport through the brain endothelial wall, i.e., the blood-
brain barrier (BBB). To test whether these observations are reconcilable with
the free-hormone hypothesis, a tracer-kinetic model is used Endocrinology
113(1), 391-8, 1983, Stimulation of sugar transport in cultured heart cells by
triiodothyronine (T2) covalently bound to red blood cells and by T3 in the
presence of serum, Dickstein Y, Schwartz H, Gross J, Gordon A.  
  
Endocrinology 1987 Sep; 121(3): 1185-91. Stereospecificity of triiodothyronine
transport into brain, liver, and salivary gland: role of carrier- and plasma
protein-mediated transport. Terasaki T, Pardridge WM. J. Neurophysiol 1994
Jul;72(1):380-91. Film autoradiography identifies unique features of
[125I]3,3'5'-(reverse) triiodothyronine transport from blood to brain. Cheng
LY, Outterbridge LV, Covatta ND, Martens DA, Gordon JT, Dratman MB  
  
Brain Res 1991 Jul 19;554(1-2):229-36. Transport of iodothyronines from
bloodstream to brain: contributions by blood:brain and choroid
plexus:cerebrospinal fluid barriers. Dratman MB, Crutchfield FL, Schoenhoff
MB..  
  
Mech Ageing Dev 1990 Mar 15;52(2-3):141-7. Blood-brain transport of
triiodothyronine is reduced in aged rats. Mooradian AD Geriatrics Section,
Tucson VA Medical Center, AZ.  
  
Endocrinology 1987 Sep;121(3):1185-91. Stereospecificity of triiodothyronine
transport into brain, liver, and salivary gland: role of carrier- and plasma
protein-mediated transport. Terasaki T, Pardridge WM. J Clin Invest 1984
Sep;74(3):745-52. Tracer kinetic model of blood-brain barrier transport of
plasma protein-bound ligands. Empiric testing of the free hormone hypothesis.
Pardridge WM, Landaw EM.  
  
Endocrinology 1980 Dec;107(6):1705-10. Transport of thyroid and steroid
hormones through the blood-brain barrier of the newborn rabbit: primary role
of protein-bound hormone. Pardridge WM, Mietus LJ. Endocrinology 1979 Sep;
105(3): 605-12. Carrier-mediated transport of thyroid hormones through the rat
blood-brain barrier: primary role of albumin-bound hormone. Pardridge WM.  
  
Endocrinology 1975 Jun;96(6):1357-65. Triiodothyronine binding in rat anterior
pituitary, posterior pituitary, median eminence and brain. Gordon A, Spira O.  
  
Endocr Rev 1989 Aug;10(3):232-74. The free hormone hypothesis: a
physiologically based mathematical model. Mendel CM. Biochim Biophys Acta 1991
Mar 4;1073(2):275-84. Transport of steroid hormones facilitated by serum
proteins. Watanabe S, Tani T, Watanabe S, Seno M Kanagawa.  
  
D Novitzky, H Fontanet, M Snyder, N Coblio, D Smith, V Parsonnet, Impact of
triiodothyronine on the survival of high-risk patients undergoing open heart
surgery, Cardiology, 1996, Vol 87, Iss 6, pp 509-515. Biochim Biophys Acta
1997. Jan 16;1318(1-2):173-83 Regulation of the energy coupling in
mitochondria by some steroid and thyroid hormones. Starkov AA, Simonyan RA,
Dedukhova VI, Mansurova SE, Palamarchuk LA, Skulachev VP  
  
Thyroid 1996 Oct;6(5):531-6. Novel actions of thyroid hormone: the role of
triiodothyronine in cardiac transplantation. Novitzky D. Rev Med Chil 1996
Oct;124(10):1248-50. [Severe cardiac failure as complication of primary
hypothyroidism]. Novik V, Cardenas IE, Gonzalez R, Pena M, Lopez Moreno JM.  
  
Cardiology 1996 Nov-Dec;87(6):509-15. Impact of triiodothyronine on the
survival of high-risk patients undergoing open heart surgery. Novitzky D,
Fontanet H, Snyder M, Coblio N, Smith D, Parsonnet V Curr Opin Cardiol 1996
Nov;11(6):603-9. The use of thyroid hormone in cardiac surgery. Dyke C  
  
N Koibuchi, S Matsuzaki, K Ichimura, H Ohtake, S Yamaoka. Ontogenic changes in
the expression of cytochrome c oxidase subunit I gene in the cerebellar cortex
of the perinatal hypothyroid rat. Endocrinology, 1996, Vol 137, Iss 11, pp
5096-5108.  
  
Biokhimiia 1984 Aug;49(8):1350-6. [The nature of thyroid hormone receptors.
Translocation of thyroid hormones through plasma membranes]. [Article in
Russian] Azimova ShS, Umarova GD, Petrova OS, Tukhtaev KR, Abdukarimov A. The
in vivo translocation of thyroxine-binding blood serum prealbumin (TBPA) was
studied. It was found that the TBPA-hormone complex penetrates-through the
plasma membrane into the cytoplasm of target cells. Electron microscopic
autoradiography revealed that blood serum TBPA is localized in ribosomes of
target cells as well as in mitochondria, lipid droplets and Golgi complex.
Negligible amounts of the translocated TBPA is localized in lysosomes of the
cells insensitive to thyroid hormones (spleen macrophages). Study of T4- and
T3-binding proteins from rat liver cytoplasm demonstrated that one of them has
the antigenic determinants common with those of TBPA. It was shown
autoimmunoradiographically that the structure of TBPA is not altered during
its translocation.  
  
Am J Physiol 1997 Sep;273(3 Pt 1):C859-67. Cytoplasmic codiffusion of fatty
acids is not specific for fatty acid binding protein. Luxon BA, Milliano MT
[The nature of thyroid hormone receptors. Intracellular functions of
thyroxine-binding prealbumin] Azimova ShS; Normatov K; Umarova GD; Kalontarov
AI; Makhmudova AA, Biokhimiia 1985 Nov;50(11):1926-32. The effect of tyroxin-
binding prealbumin (TBPA) of blood serum on the template activity of chromatin
was studied. It was found that the values of binding constants of TBPA for T3
and T4 are 2 X 10(-11) M and 5 X 10(-10) M, respectively. The receptors
isolated from 0.4 M KCl extract of chromatin and mitochondria as well as
hormone-bound TBPA cause similar effects on the template activity of
chromatin. Based on experimental results and the previously published
comparative data on the structure of TBPA, nuclear, cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial receptors of thyroid hormones as well as on translocation across
the plasma membrane and intracellular transport of TBPA, a conclusion was
drawn, which suggested that TBPA is the "core" of the true thyroid hormone
receptor. It was shown that T3-bound TBPA caused histone H1-dependent
conformational changes in chromatin. Based on the studies with the interaction
of the TBPA-T3 complex with spin-labeled chromatin, a scheme of functioning of
the thyroid hormone nuclear receptor was proposed.  
  
[The nature of thyroid hormone receptors. Thyroxine- and triiodothyronine-
binding proteins of mitochondria] Azimova ShS; Umarova GD; Petrova OS;
Tukhtaev KR; Abdukarimov A. Biokhimiia 1984 Sep;49(9):1478-85. T4- and
T3-binding proteins of rat liver were studied. It was found that the external
mitochondrial membranes and matrix contain a protein whose electrophoretic
mobility is similar to that of thyroxine-binding blood serum prealbumin (TBPA)
and which binds either T4 or T3. This protein is precipitated by monospecific
antibodies against TBPA. The internal mitochondrial membrane has two proteins
able to bind thyroid hormones, one of which is localized in the cathode part
of the gel and binds only T3, while the second one capable of binding T4
rather than T3 and possessing the electrophoretic mobility similar to that of
TBPA.  
  
Radioimmunoprecipitation with monospecific antibodies against TBPA revealed
that this protein also the antigenic determinants common with those of TBPA.
The in vivo translocation of 125I-TBPA into submitochondrial fractions was
studied. The analysis of densitograms of submitochondrial protein fraction
showed that both TBPA and hormones are localized in the same protein
fractions. Electron microscopic autoradiography demonstrated that 125I-TBPA
enters the cytoplasm through the external membrane and is localized on the
internal mitochondrial membrane and matrix.  
  
[The nature of thyroid hormone receptors. Translocation of thyroid hormones
through plasma membranes]. Azimova ShS; Umarova GD; Petrova OS; Tukhtaev KR;
Abdukarimov A. Biokhimiia 1984 Aug;49(8):1350-6.. The in vivo translocation of
thyroxine- binding blood serum prealbumin (TBPA) was studied. It was found
that the TBPA-hormone complex penetrates-through the plasma membrane into the
cytoplasm of target cells. Electron microscopic autoradiography revealed that
blood serum TBPA is localized in ribosomes of target cells as well as in
mitochondria, lipid droplets and Golgi complex. Negligible amounts of the
translocated TBPA is localized in lysosomes of the cells insensitive to
thyroid hormones (spleen macrophages). Study of T4- and T3-binding proteins
from rat liver cytoplasm demonstrated that one of them has the antigenic
determinants common with those of TBPA. It was shown
autoimmunoradiographically that the structure of TBPA is not altered during
its translocation. Endocrinology 1987 Apr;120(4):1590-6 Brain cortex reverse
triiodothyronine (rT3) and triiodothyronine concentrations under steady state
infusions of thyroxine and rT3. Goumaz MO, Kaiser CA, Burger AG.  
  
Gen Comp Endocrinol 1996 Aug;103(2):200-8 Characteristics of the uptake of
3,5,3'-triiodo-L-thyronine and L-thyroxine into red blood cells of rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). McLeese JM, Eales JG.  
  
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 1998 Feb;22(2):293-310. Increase in
red blood cell triiodothyronine uptake in untreated unipolar major depressed
patients compared to healthy volunteers. Moreau X, Azorin JM, Maurel M,
Jeanningros R.  
  
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 1998 Feb;22(2):293-310. Increase in
red blood cell triiodothyronine uptake in untreated unipolar major depressed
patients compared to healthy volunteers. Moreau X, Azorin JM, Maurel M,
Jeanningros R.  
  
Biochem J 1982 Oct 15;208(1):27-34. Evidence that the uptake of tri-iodo-L-
thyronine by human erythrocytes is carrier-mediated but not energy-dependent.
Docter R, Krenning EP, Bos G, Fekkes DF, Hennemann G. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1990 Dec;71(6):1589-95. Transport of thyroid hormones by human erythrocytes:
kinetic characterization in adults and newborns. Osty J, Valensi P, Samson M,
Francon J, Blondeau JP. J Endocrinol Invest 1999 Apr;22(4):257-61. Kinetics of
red blood cell T3 uptake in hypothyroidism with or without hormonal
replacement, in the rat. Moreau X, Lejeune PJ, Jeanningros R.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

