![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Thyroid, insomnia, and the insanities: Commonalities in disease**  

**SOME FACTORS IN STRESS, INSOMNIA AND THE BRAIN SYNDROMES:**

Serotonin, an important mediator of stress, shock, and inflammation, is a
vasoconstrictor that impairs circulation in a great variety of circumstances.

Stress impairs metabolism, and serotonin suppresses mitochondrial energy
production.

Stress and shock tend to increase our absorption of bacterial endotoxin from
the intestine, and endotoxin causes the release of serotonin from platelets in
the blood.

Schizophrenia is one outcome of stress, both cumulative and acute. Prenatal
stress commonly predisposes a person to develop schizophrenia at a later age.

Serotonins restriction of circulation to the uterus is a major factor in
toxemia of pregnancy and related complications of pregnancy.

Hypothyroidism increases serotonin activity in the body, as it increases
estrogen dominance.

Estrogen inhibits the enzyme monoamino oxidase (MAO), and is highly associated
with increased serotonin activity. Progesterone has the opposite effect on
MAO.

The frontal lobes of the brain are hypometabolic in schizophrenia. Serotonin
can cause vasoconstriction in the brain.

Serotonin release causes lipid peroxidation.

Schizophrenics have high levels of lipid peroxidation.

Antioxidants, including uric acid, are deficient in schizophrenics.

Therapies which improve mitochondrial respiration alleviate the symptoms of
schizophrenia.

Energy depletion leads to brain atrophy, but with normal stimulation and
nutrition even adult brains can grow.

Schizophrenics and depressed people have defective sleep.

Increasing the bodys energy level and temperature improves the quality of
sleep.

================

Everyone is familiar with the problem of defining insanity, in the case of
people who plead innocent by reason of insanity. The official definition of
insanity in criminal law is the inability to tell right from wrong.
Obviously, that cant be generalized to everyday life, because any sane person
realizes that certainty is impossible, and that most situations, including
elections, offer you at best the choice of the lesser of two evils, or the
opportunity to do the right thing, and to throw your vote away. People who
persist in doing what they know is really right are eccentric, in the sense
that they dont adapt to societys norms. In a society that chooses to destroy
ecosystems, rather than adapting to them, the question of sanity should be an
everyday political issue.

The use of medical terms tends to give authority to the people who are in
charge of defining the terms, and it can give the impression of objectivity
when there really isnt any scientific validity behind the terms. In their
historical senses, crazy (flawed) and insane (unsound) are probably more
objective terms than the medically-invented terms, dementia praecox (premature
idiocy) or schizophrenia (divided mind).

Odd Speech is one of the dimensions used in the diagnosis of insanity. I am
reminded of William Wordsworths dismissal of William Blake as insane after
failing to understand some of Blakes poems--Wordsworth was conventional
enough to become Englands Poet Laureate, and to his limited perspective,
Blakes clear verses were incomprehensibly odd.

Whenever a trusted government employee decides to blow the whistle on criminal
activities, his agency invariably puts out the information that this now
discharged employee is psychologically unbalanced. Dissent, in other words, is
easy to dispose of by psychiatric tainting.

If we are going to speak of mental impairment, then we should have objective
measures of what we are talking about. Blake unquestionably could do anything
better than Wordsworth, because he was neither stupid nor dishonest, and its
almost a rule that ordinary employees are more competent than the
administrators who evaluate their work. Objective standards of mental
impairment would be more popular among patients than among diagnosticians,
judges, and lawmakers.

In a famous test of the objectivity of diagnosis, a filmed interview with a
patient was shown to British and U.S. psychiatrists. 69% of the Americans
diagnosed the patient as schizophrenic, but only 2% of the British
psychiatrists did.

The strictly medical/psychological definition of insanity is still, despite
the existence of the International Classification of Diseases, and in the U.S.
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, which enumerate a large number of
mental disorders, a crazily indefinite grouping of symptoms, and hasnt made
diagnosis more objective.. For example, in the last 30 years autism has been
separated from childhood schizophrenia, but now the tendency is for both of
them to be called developmental brain disorders. Both schizophrenia and autism
are now often described in terms of a spectrum of conditions, which hardly
matters, since they are not understood in terms of cause, prevention, or cure.

The problem is in the history of psychosis as a medical idea. About 100 years
ago, attempts were made to classify psychoses by their symptoms, unifying a
great variety of old diagnostic categories into two groups, manic-depressive
mood disorders, and dementia praecox, or schizophrenia, which (as indicated
by its name, premature dementia) was considered to be progressive and
incurable. Several kinds of mental disorder were found to have clear causes,
including vitamin deficiencies and various poisons and infections, but the
idea of a certain thing called schizophrenia still persists.

The unitary concept of psychosis grew up in a culture in which endogenous
insanity was a hereditary taint, that for a time was treated by
imprisonment, and that more recently has been treated with sterilization or
euthanasia to eliminate the insanity genes.

The idea that the disease is in the genes now serves the drug industry well,
since they offer chemicals that will correct the specific chemical error.

Not all psychiatrists and psychologists subscribed to the idea of a unitary
psychosis, defined by a variety of symptoms. A positive contribution of
Freudian psychoanalysis (and its congeners and competitors) was that it made
people think in terms of causes and the possibility of cures, instead of
hopelessness, stigmatization, isolation and eradication. Although Freud
expressed the thought that biological causes and cures would eventually be
found, the profession he founded was not sympathetic to the idea of
physiological therapies.

Looking for general physiological problems behind the various symptoms is very
different from the practice of classifying the insanities according to their
symptoms and the hypothetical brain chemicals that are believed to cause
the symptoms. The fact that some patients hallucinate caused many
psychiatrists to believe that hallucinogenic chemicals, interfering with nerve
transmitter substances such as dopamine or serotonin, were going to provide
insight into psychotic states. The dopamine excess (or serotonin deficiency)
theories developed at a time when only a few transmitter substances were
known, and when they were thought to act as very specific on/off nerve
switches, rather than as links in metabolic networks. The drug industry helps
to keep those ideas alive.

The idea that the brain is like a computer, and that the nerves are like wires
and switches, is behind all of the theories about transmitter substances and
synapses. If this metaphor about the nature of the brain and the organism is
fundamentally wrong, then the theories of schizophrenia based on nerve
transmitter substances can hardly be right. Another theory of schizophrenia
based on the computer metaphor has to do with the idea that nerve cells wire-
like and switch-like functions depend on their membranes, and, in the most
popular version, that these all-important membranes are made of fish oil. The
supporting evidence is supposed to be that the fish-oil-like fatty acids are
depleted from the tissues of schizophrenics. Just looking at that point, the
evidence is more likely to be the result of stress, which depletes
unsaturated fatty acids, especially of the specified type, in producing lipid
peroxides and other toxic molecules.

In one of its variations, the essential fatty acid deficiency doctrine
suggests that a certain prostaglandin deficiency is the cause of
schizophrenia, but experiments have shown that an excess of that prostaglandin
mimics the symptoms of psychosis.

The drug industrys effect on the way the organism is commonly understood has
been pervasively pathological. For example, the dogma about cell surface
receptors has sometimes explicitly led people to say that the brain
chemicals are active only at the surface of cells, and not inside the cells.

The consequences of this mistake have been catastrophic. For example,
serotonins precursor, tryptophan, and the drugs called serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, and other serotonergic drugs, and serotonin itself, are
carcinogenic and/or tumor promoters. Excessive serotonin is a major factor in
kidney and heart failure, liver and lung disease, stroke, pituitary
abnormalities, inflammatory diseases, practically every kind of sickness, at
the beginning, middle, and end of life. In the brain, serotonin regulates
circulation and mitochondrial function, temperature, respiration and appetite,
alertness and learning, secretion of prolactin, growth hormones and stress
hormones, and participates in the most complex biochemical webs. But the
pharmaceutical industrys myth has led people to believe that serotonin is the
chemical of happiness, and that tryptophan is its benign nutritional
precursor, and that they are going to harmlessly influence the receptors on
nerve membranes.

A particular drug has many effects other than those that are commonly
recognized as its mechanism of action, but when an antidepressant or a
tranquilizer or a serotonin reuptake inhibitor alleviates a particular
condition, some people argue that the condition must have been caused by the
specific chemistry that the drug is thought to affect. Because of the
computer metaphor for the brain, these effects are commonly thought to be
primarily in the synapses, the membranes, and the transmitter chemicals.

The argument for a genetic cause of schizophrenia relies heavily on twin
studies in which the frequency of both twins being schizophrenic is contrasted
to the normal incidence of schizophrenia in the population, which is usually
about 1%. There is a concordance of 30% to 40% between monozygotic (identical)
twins, and a 5% to 10% concordance between fraternal twins, and both of these
rates are higher than that of other siblings in the same family. That argument
neglects the closer similarity of the intrauterine conditions experienced by
twins, for example the sharing of the same placenta, and experiencing more
concordant biochemical interactions between fetus and mother.

Defects of the brain, head, face, and even hands and fingerprints are seen
more frequently in the genetically identical twin who later develops
schizophrenia than the twin who doesnt develop schizophrenia. Of the twins,
it is the baby with the lower birth weight and head size that is at a greater
risk of developing schizophrenia.

Oliver Gillie (in his book, Who Do You Think You Are?) discussed some of the
fraud that has occurred in twin studies, but no additional fraud is needed
when the non-genetic explanation is simply ignored and excluded from
discussion. The editors of most medical and scientific journals are so
convinced of the reality of genetic determination that they wont allow their
readers to see criticisms of it.

Prenatal malnutriton or hormonal stress or other stresses are known to damage
the brain, and especially its most highly evolved and metabolically active
frontal lobes, and to reduce its growth, relative to the rest of the body.

The standard medical explanation for the association of pregnancy toxemia and
eclampsia with birth defects has been, until recently, that both mother and
child were genetically inferior, and that the defective child created the
pregnancy sickness. The same reasoning has been invoked to explain the
association of birth complications with later disease: The defective baby was
the cause of a difficult birth. That argument has recently been discredited
(McNeil and Cantor-Graae, 1999).

Schizophrenics are known to have had a higher rate of obstetrical
complications, including oxygen deprivation and Cesarian deliveries, than
normal people. Like people with Alzheimers disease, the circumference of
their heads at birth was small, in proportion to their body weight and
gestational age.

Animal studies show that perinatal brain problems tend to persist, influencing
the brains metabolism and function in adulthood.

Like the other major brain diseases, shizophrenia involves a low metabolic
rate in crucial parts of the brain. In schizophrenics, hypofrontality, low
metabolism of the frontal lobes, is characteristic, along with abnormal
balance between the hemispheres, and other regional imbalances.

A very important form of prenatal stress occurs in toxemia and preeclampsia,
in which estrogen is dominant, and endotoxin and serotonin create a stress
reaction with hypertension and impaired blood circulation to the uterus and
placenta.

The brain, just like any organ or tissue, is an energy-producing metabolic
system, and its oxidative metabolism is extremely intense, and it is more
dependent on oxygen for continuous normal functioning than any other organ.
Without oxygen, its characteristic functioning (consciousness) stops instantly
(when blood flow stops, blindness begins in about three seconds, and other
responses stop after a few more seconds). The concentration of ATP, which is
called the cellular energy molecule, doesnt decrease immediately. Nothing
detectable happens to the neurotransmitters, synapses, or membrane
structures in this short period; consciousness is a metabolic process that,
in the computer metaphor, would be the flow of electrons itself, under the
influence of an electromotive force, a complex but continuous sort of
electromagnetic field. The computer metaphor would seem to have little to
offer for understanding the brain.

In this context, I think its necessary, for the present, to ignore the
diagnostic details, the endless variety of qualifications of the idea of
schizophrenia, that fill the literature. Those diagnostic concepts seem to
tempt people to look for the precise cause of this particular subcategory of
schizophrenia, and to believe that a specific drug or combination of drugs
will be found to treat it, while encouraging them to ignore the patients
physiology and history.

If we use the standard medical terms at all, it should be with the recognition
that they are, in their present and historical form, not scientifically
meaningful.

The idea that schizophrenia is a disease in itself tends to distract attention
from the things it has in common with Alzheimers disease, autism, depression,
mania, the manic-depressive syndrome, the hyperactivity-attention deficit
syndrome, and many other physical and mental problems. When brain
abnormalities are found in schizophrenics but not in their normal siblings,
it could be tempting to see the abnormalities as the cause of schizophrenia,
unless we see similar abnormalities in a variety of sicknesses.

For the present, its best to think first in the most general terms possible,
such as a brain stress syndrome, which will include brain aging, stroke,
altitude sickness, seizures, malnutrition, poisoning, the despair brought on
by inescapable stress, and insomnia, which are relatively free of culturally
arbitrary definitions. Difficulty in learning, remembering, and analyzing are
objective enough that it could be useful to see what they have to do with a
brain stress syndrome.

Stress damages the energy producing systems of cells, especially the aerobic
mitochondria, in many ways, and this damage can often be repaired. The
insanities that are most often called schizophrenia tend to occur in late
adolescence, or around menopause, or in old age, which are times of stress,
especially hormonal stress. Post-partum psychosis often has features that
resemble schizophrenia.

Although the prenatal factors that predispose a person toward the brain stress
syndrome, and those that trigger specific symptoms later in life, might seem
to be utterly different, the hormonal and biochemical reactions are probably
closely related, involving the adaptive responses of various functional
systems to the problem of insufficient adaptive ability and inadequate energy.

By considering cellular energy production, local blood flow, and the systemic
support system, we can get insight into some of the biochemical events that
are involved in therapies that are sometimes successful. A unified concept of
health and disease will help to understand both the origins and the
appropriate treatments for a great variety of brain stress syndromes.

The simple availability of oxygen, and the ability to use it, are regulated by
carbon dioxide and serotonin, which act in opposite directions. Carbon dioxide
inhibits the release of serotonin. Carbon dioxide and serotonin are regulated
most importantly by thyroid function. Hypothyroidism is characterized by
increased levels of both noradrenalin and serotonin, and of other stress-
related hormones, including cortisol and estrogen. Estrogen shifts the balance
of the neurotransmitters in the same direction, toward increased serotonin
and adrenalin, for example by inhibiting enzymes that degrade the monoamine
neurotransmitters.

When an animal such as a squirrel approaches hibernation and is producing less
carbon dioxide, the decrease in carbon dioxide releases serotonin, which slows
respiration, lowers temperature, suppresses appetite, and produces torpor.

But in energy-deprived humans, increases of adrenalin oppose the hibernation
reaction, alter energy production and the ability to relax, and to sleep
deeply and with restorative effect.

In several ways, torpor is the opposite of sleep. Rapid eye movement (REM),
that occurs at intervals during sleep and in association with increased
respiration, disappears when the brain of a hibernating animal falls below a
certain temperature. But torpor isnt like non-REM deep sleep, and in fact
seems to be like wakefulness, in the sense that a sleep-debt is incurred:
Hibernating animals periodically come out of torpor so they can sleep, and in
those periods, when their temperature rises sharply, they have a very high
percentage of deep slow wave sleep.

Although it is common to speak of sleep and hibernation as variations on the
theme of economizing on energy expenditure, I suspect that nocturnal sleep has
the special function of minimizing the stress of darkness itself, and that it
has subsidiary functions, including its now well confirmed role in the
consolidation and organization of memory. This view of sleep is consistent
with observations that disturbed sleep is associated with obesity, and that
the torpor-hibernation chemical, serotonin, powerfully interferes with
learning.

Babies spend most of their time sleeping, and during life the amount of time
spent sleeping decreases, with nightly sleeping time decreasing by about half
an hour per decade after middle age. Babies have an extremely high metabolic
rate and a stable temperature. With age the metabolic rate progressively
declines, and as a result the ability to maintain an adequate body temperature
tends to decrease with aging.

(The simple fact that body temperature regulates all organic functions,
including brain waves, is habitually overlooked. The actions of a drug on
brain waves, for example, may be mediated by its effects on body temperature,
but this wouldnt be very interesting to pharmacologists looking for
transmitter-specific drugs.)

Torpor is the opposite of restful sleep, and with aging, depression,
hypothyroidism, and a variety of brain syndromes, sleep tends toward the
hypothermic torpor.

An individual cell behaves analogously to the whole person. A babys high
energy resting state is paralleled by the stable condition of a cell that is
abundantly charged with energy; ATP and carbon dioxide are at high levels in
these cells. Progesterones effects on nerve cells include favoring the high
energy resting state, and this is closely involved in progesterones
thermogenic effect, in which it raises the temperature set-point.

The basal metabolic rate, which is mainly governed by thyroid, roughly
corresponds to the average body temperature. However, in hypothyroidism, there
is an adaptive increase in the activity of the sympathetic nervous system,
producing more adrenalin, which helps to maintain body temperature by causing
vasoconstriction in the skin. In aging, menopause, and various stressful
conditions, the increased adrenalin (and the increased cortisol production
which is produced by excess adrenalin) causes a tendency to wake more easily,
and to have less restful sleep.

While the early morning body temperature will sometimes be low in
hypothyroidism, I have found many exceptions to this. In protein deficiency,
sodium deficiency, in menopause with flushing symptoms, and in both phases of
the manic depression cycle, and in some schizophrenics, the morning
temperature is high, corresponding to very high levels of adrenalin and
cortisol. Taking the temperature before and after breakfast will show a
reduction of temperature, the opposite of what occurs in simple
hypothyroidism, because raising the blood sugar permits the adrenalin and
cortisol to fall.

The characteristic sleep pattern of hypothyroidism and old age is similar to
the pattern seen in schizophrenia and depression, a decrease of deep slow wave
sleep. Serotonin, like torpor, produces a similar effect. In other words, a
torpor-like state can be seen in all of these brain-stress states. Several
studies have found that anti-serotonin drugs improve sleep, and also reduce
symptoms of schizophrenia and depression. It is common for the neuroleptic
drugs to raise body temperature, even pathologically as in the neuroleptic
malignant syndrome.

In old people, who lose heat easily during the day, their extreme increase in
the compensatory nervous and hormonal adrenalin activity causes their night-
time heat regulation (vasoconstriction in the extremities) to rise to normal.

Increased body temperature improves sleep, especially the deep slow wave
sleep. A hot bath, or even warming the feet, has the same effect as thyroid in
improving sleep. Salty and sugary foods taken at bedtime, or during the night,
help to improve the quality and duration of sleep. Both salt and sugar lower
the adrenalin level, and both tend to raise the body temperature.

Hypothyroidism tends to cause the blood and other body fluids to be deficient
in both sodium and glucose. Consuming salty carbohydrate foods momentarily
makes up to some extent for the thyroid deficiency.

In the peiodic table of the elements, lithium is immediately above sodium,
meaning that it has the chemical properties of sodium, but with a smaller
atomic radius, which makes its electrical charge more intense. Its
physiological effects are so close to sodiums that we can get clues to
sodiums actions by watching what lithium does.

Chronic consumption of lithium blocks the release of adrenalin from the
adrenal glands, and it also has extensive antiserotonin effects, inhibiting
its release from some sites, and blocking its actions at others.

Lithium forms a complex with the ammonia molecule, and since the ammonia
molecule mimics the effects of serotonin, especially in fatigue, this could be
involved in lithiums antiserotonergic effects. Ammonia, like serotonin,
impairs mitochondrial energy production (at a minimum, it uses energy in being
converted to urea), so anti-ammonia, anti-serotonin agents make more energy
available for adaptation. Lithium has been demonstrated to restore the energy
metabolism of mitochondria (Gulidova, 1977).

Therapies that have been successful in treating schizophrenia include
penicillin, sleep therapy, hyperbaric oxygen, carbon dioxide therapy, thyroid,
acetazolamide, lithium and vitamins. These all make fundamental contributions
to the restoration of biological energy. Antibiotics, for example, lower
endotoxin formation in the intestine, protect against the induction by
endotoxin of serotonin, histamine, estrogen, and cortisol. Acetazolamide
causes the tissues to retain carbon dioxide, and increased carbon dioxide
acidifies cells, preventing serotonin secretion.

REFERENCES

Gen Pharmacol 1994 Oct;25(6):1257-1262. Serotonin-induced decrease in brain
ATP, stimulation of brain anaerobic glycolysis and elevation of plasma
hemoglobin; the protective action of calmodulin antagonists. Koren-Schwartzer
N, Chen-Zion M, Ben-Porat H, Beitner R Department of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat Gan, Israel. 1\. Injection of serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine) to rats, induced a dramatic fall in brain ATP level,
accompanied by an increase in P(i). Concomitant to these changes, the activity
of cytosolic phosphofructokinase, the rate-limiting enzyme of glycolysis, was
significantly enhanced. Stimulation of anaerobic glycolysis was also reflected
by a marked increase in lactate content in brain. 2. Brain glucose
1,6-bisphosphate level was decreased, whereas fructose 2,6-bisphosphate was
unaffected by serotonin. 3. All these serotonin-induced changes in brain,
which are characteristic for cerebral ischemia, were prevented by treatment
with the calmodulin (CaM) antagonists, trifluoperazine or thioridazine. 4.
Injection of serotonin also induced a marked elevation of plasma hemoglobin,
reflecting lysed erythrocytes, which was also prevented by treatment with the
CaM antagonists. 5. The present results suggest that CaM antagonists may be
effective drugs in treatment of many pathological conditions and diseases in
which plasma serotonin levels are known to increase.

WMJ 1990 Nov-Dec;62(6):93-7. [Effect of inflammatory mediators on respiration
in rat liver mitochondria]. Semenov VL.

Vopr Med Khim 1990 Sep-Oct;36(5):18-21 [Regulation by biogenic amines of
energy functions of mitochondria]. Medvedev A.E. Biogenic amines
(phenylethylamine, tyramine, dopamine, tryptamine, serotonin and spermine)
decreased activities of the rotenone-insensitive NADH-cytochrome c reductase,
the succinate cytochrome c reductase and the succinate dehydrogenase.

Vopr Med Khim 1991 Sep-Oct;37(5):2-6. [The role of monoamine oxidase in the
regulation of mitochondrial energy functions]. Medvedev AE, Gorkin VZ.

Lik Sprava 1997 Jan-Feb;(1):61-5. [Microhemodynamics and energy metabolism in
schizophrenia patients]. Kut'ko II, Frolov VM, Rachkauskas GS, Pavlenko VV,
Petrunia AM. An apparent disturbance was revealed in microhaemodynamics of
patients diagnosed as having schizophrenia (n = 210) which was more pronounced
in continuously progredient form of the above medical condition. An increase
in conjunctival indexes, polymorphic character of capillaries, decrease in
numbers of capillary loops were revealed by biomicroscopy of the bulbar
conjunctiva and capillaroscopy respectively. The patients showed lowering of
ATP level and rise in the content of cathodic LDG4-LDG5 fractions,
accumulation in blood of lactic and pyruvic acids.

Schizophr Res 1996 Oct 18;22(1):41-7. Are reduced head circumference at birth
and increased obstetric complications associated only with schizophrenic
psychosis? A comparison with schizo-affective and unspecified functional
psychoses. McNeil TF, Cantor-Graae E, Nordstrom LG, Rosenlund T.

Schizophr Res 1993 Jun;10(1):7-14. Puberty and the onset of psychosis. Galdos
PM, van Os JJ, Murray RM Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
Bethlem Royal Hospital, London, UK. According to the neurodevelopmental
hypothesis of schizophrenia, maturational events in the brain at puberty
interact with congenital defects to produce psychotic symptoms. As girls reach
puberty at a younger age than boys, we predicted that (i) females would show
earlier onset of psychotic illness arising around puberty, and (ii) onset of
psychosis in females would be related to menarche. Analysis of epidemiological
data regarding admission to psychiatric units in (a) England over the period
1973-1986, (b) France over the period 1975`-1980, as well as examination of 97
psychotic adolescents referred to an adolescent unit over a 14 year period,
supported both these propositions.

Int J Psychophysiol 1999 Dec;34(3):237-47. Timing of puberty and syndromes of
schizotypy: a replication. Kaiser J, Gruzelier JH. Active syndrome findings
were confined to the male subsample with late maturing males showing higher
scores on the Cognitive Failures and Odd Speech subscales than early maturers.
As in the previous study, there was no relationship between a global psychosis
proneness scale and maturational rate. These findings support a
neurodevelopmental model of psychosis-proneness and show the importance of
adopting a syndromal view.

Am J Physiol 1978 Mar;234(3):H300-4. Potentiation of the cerebrovascular
response to intra-arterial 5-hydroxytryptamine. Eidelman BH, Mendelow AD,
McCalden TA, Bloom DS. Infusion of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT) into the internal
carotid artery of normal baboons was not accompanied by alteration of gray
matter cerebral blood flow. In animals pretreated with depot estrogen and
progesterone (dosage equivalent to oral contraceptive preparations), infusion
of 5HT produced a marked decrease in gray matter blood flow. A similar
decrease in flow was obtained when the 5HT was infused with a concentrate of
beta-lipoprotein. Steroid substances appear to enhance the cerebrovascular
constrictor responses to 5HT. A further series of six experiments has shown
that the monoamine oxidase inhibitor tranylcypromine similarly produced
constrictor responses to 5HT. It is possible that the steroids, the beta-
lipoprotein, and the tranylcypromine produced constrictor responses to 5HT by
the same mechanism (inhibition of cerebrovascular monoamine oxidase).

FASEB J 1989 Apr;3(6):1753-9. Steroid regulation of monoamine oxidase activity
in the adrenal medulla. Youdim MB, Banerjee DK, Kelner K, Offutt L, Pollard
HB. Administration of different steroid hormones in vivo has distinct and
specific effects on the MAO activity of the adrenal medulla. As in the
intact animal, we found that endothelial cell MAO activity was stimulated 1.5-
2.5-fold by 10 microM progesterone, hydrocortisone, and dexamethasone,
inhibited by ca. 50% by 17-alpha-estradiol, but unaffected by testosterone.
. . . steroid-induced changes in total cell division ([14C]thymidine
incorporation) and total protein synthesis ([14C]leucine incorporation) were
seen after changes in MAO A.

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1984 Apr;229(1):244-9 Mechanisms of specific change by
estradiol in sensitivity of rat uterus to serotonin. Ichida S, Oda Y, Tokunaga
H, Hayashi T, Murakami T, Kita T.

Neuroendocrinology 1983;36 (3): 235-41. Gonadal hormone regulation of MAO and
other enzymes in hypothalamic areas. Luine VN, Rhodes JC. Activities of type
A monoamine oxidase (MAO), acetylcholine esterase (AChE), and
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) were differentially altered in
hormone-sensitive areas of the preoptic-hypothalamic continuum after
administration of estrogen and progesterone. Estrogen decreased activity of
MAO in the PVE of the anterior hypothalamus, pars lateralis of the
ventromedial nucleus and in the Ar-ME. Acute administration of progesterone (1
h) to estrogen-treated females did not further alter estrogen-dependent
changes in AChE or G6PDH; however, MAO activity in the ventromedial nucleus
and Ar-ME was rapidly increased after progesterone. Administration of the
protein synthesis inhibitor anisomycin prior to progesterone did not
antagonize progesterone-dependent increases in MAO. Progesterone added in
vitro to homogenates from estrogen-treated but not from untreated females
increased MAO activity.

J Neurochem 1981 Sep;37(3):640-8. Gonadal influences on the sexual
differentiation of monoamine oxidase type A and B activities in the rat brain.
Vaccari A, Caviglia A, Sparatore A, Biassoni R When masculinization was
prevented by neonatal administration of estradiol (E) to males, hypothalamic
MAO-A and MAO-B activities increased in both control and MAO-inhibited rats.
. . . single, high doses of steroids to adult, but not to newborn rats, did
acutely affect the kinetics of MAO-A. The activity of MAO-A was also decreased
by high concentrations of E or TS in vitro. The imprinting for patterns of
hypothalamic MAO-A and MAO-B in the two sexes results, probably, from genetic
predetermination.

Gynecol Obstet Invest 2000;49(3):150-5. Transport and metabolism of serotonin
in the human placenta from normal and severely pre-eclamptic pregnancies.
Carrasco G, Cruz MA, Gallardo V, Miguel P, Dominguez A, Gonzalez C. These
findings suggest that the higher plasma-free serotonin levels observed in
severe pre-eclampsia are mainly due to a reduction in MAO-A activity and not
limited by the rate of serotonin uptake into the cells.

Psychiatry Res 1989 Jun;28(3):279-88. Acetazolamide and thiamine: an ancillary
therapy for chronic mental illness. Sacks W, Esser AH, Feitel B, Abbott K
Cerebral Metabolism Laboratory, Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research, Orangeburg, NY 10962. Twenty-four chronic schizophrenic patients
were treated successfully with the addition of acetazolamide and thiamine (A +
T) to their unchanged existing therapies in a double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study. Therapeutic effects were measured by the Scale for the
Assessment of Positive Symptoms and the Scale for the Assessment of Negative
Symptoms. Overall, 50% of the patients showed improvement on all assessment
scales. No untoward effects occurred in these patients or in patients in
previous studies who have been treated continuously with A + T therapy for as
long as 3 years.

J Neural Transm 1998;105(8-9):975-86. Role of tryptophan in the elevated
serotonin-turnover in hepatic encephalopathy. Herneth AM, Steindl P, Ferenci
P, Roth E, Hortnagl H. The increase of the brain levels of
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in hepatic encephalopathy (HE) suggests an
increased turnover of serotonin (5-HT).

J Neurosci Res 1981;6(2):225-36 A difference in the in vivo cerebral
production of [1-14C] lactate from D-[3-14C] glucose in chronic mental
patients. Sacks W, Schechter DC, Sacks S. Previously unpublished whole-blood
lactate determinations in these experiments indicated a cerebral production of
much higher specific activity of [1-14C]-lactate from the D-[3-14C] glucose by
mental patients.

Ther Umsch 2000 Feb;57(2):76-80. [Antidepressive therapy by modifying sleep].
Haug HJ, Fahndrich E.

Schizophr Res 1998 Jun 22;32(1):1-8. Reduced status of plasma total
antioxidant capacity in schizophrenia. Yao JK, Reddy R, McElhinny LG, van
Kammen DP.

FASEB J 1998 Dec;12(15):1777-83. Increased F2-isoprostanes in Alzheimer's
disease: evidence for enhanced lipid peroxidation in vivo. Pratico D, MY Lee
V, Trojanowski JQ, Rokach J, Fitzgerald GA.

Dis Nerv Syst 1976 Feb;37(2):98-103. Glucose-insulin metabolism in chronic
schizophrenia. Brambilla F, Guastalla A, Guerrini A, Riggi F, Rovere C,
Zanoboni A, Zanoboni-Muciaccia W.

Psychiatr Clin (Basel) 1975;8(6):304-13. Blood flow and oxidative metabolism
of the brain in patients with schizophrenia. Hoyer S, Oesterreich K.

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1977;77(8):1179-86 [Effect of lithium
on the energy metabolism of nervous tissue]. Gulidova GP, Khzardzhian VG,
Mikhailova NM. "Lithium (0.5--4 mM) either significantly increase, either
completely normalizers the intensity of the oxidative and energy metabolism of
the brain mitochondria, decreased by the influence of the blood serum of
patients with manic-depressive psychosis and attack like schizophrenia."
"Processes of phosphorilation become normalized in a joint action on the
mitochondria by lithium and antioxidants." "It is assumed that an increase in
the intensity of the energy metabolism is one of the mechanisms of
therapeutical and prophylactic action of lithium."

Ateneo Parmense Acta Biomed 1975 Jan-Apr;46(1-2):5-19. [Clinical significance
of changes in tryptophan metabolism]. Ambanelli U, Manganelli P. "The
oxidative pathway is most important of the metabolic pathway of the amino
acid; the degredation of tryptophan is particularly influenced by steroid
hormones and vitamins' want. The metabolic anomalies are demonstrable both in
malignant tumors (mostly in bladder cancer and Hodgkin's disease), both during
psychiatric diseases (such as depression and schizophrenia) and in the
diseases of connective tissue in addition to congenital errors of the
degradation of tryptophan (such as Hartnup's disease, tryptophanuria and
3-hydroxychinureninuria)."

Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 1977;64:534-5. Blood flow and oxidative metabolism of
the brain in the course of acute schizophrenia. Hoyer S, Oesterreich K.

Med Hypotheses 1994 Dec;43(6):420-35 Schizophrenia is a diabetic brain state:
an elucidation of impaired neurometabolism. Holden RJ, Mooney PA.

Neuropsychobiology 1990-91;24(1):1-7. Frontality, laterality, and cortical-
subcortical gradient of cerebral blood flow in schizophrenia: relationship to
symptoms and neuropsychological functions. Sagawa K, Kawakatsu S, Komatani A,
Totsuka S.

Schizophr Res 1989 Nov-Dec;2(6):439-48. Effect of attention on frontal
distribution of delta activity and cerebral metabolic rate in schizophrenia.
Guich SM, Buchsbaum MS, Burgwald L, Wu J, Haier R, Asarnow R, Nuechterlein K,
Potkin S. Analysis confirmed increased delta activity in the frontal region
of patients with schizophrenia in comparison to normal controls, and a
significant correlation between increased frontal delta and relative reduction
in frontal lobe metabolism among patients with schizophrenia. This finding of
increased delta is consistent with PET, blood flow and topographic EEG studies
of schizophrenia, suggesting reduced frontal activity.

Br J Psychiatry 1990 Feb;156:216-27. Glucose metabolic rate in normals and
schizophrenics during the Continuous Performance Test assessed by positron
emission tomography. Buchsbaum MS, Nuechterlein KH, Haier RJ, Wu J, Sicotte N,
Hazlett E, Asarnow R, Potkin S, Guich S When the group of schizophrenic
patients was divided into deficit and nondeficit types, a preliminary
exploratory analysis suggested thalamic, frontal, and parietal cortical
hypometabolism in the deficit subgroup, with normal metabolism in the
nondeficit patient group in those areas; in contrast, hippocampal and anterior
cingulate cortical metabolism was reduced in both deficit and nondeficit
subtypes. These results suggest that the limbic system, especially the
hippocampus, is functionally involved in schizophrenic psychosis and that
different manifestations of schizophrenia may involve different neuronal
circuits.

Psychol Med 1994 Nov;24(4):947-55. Patterns of cortical activity in
schizophrenia. Schroeder J, Buchsbaum MS, Siegel BV, Geider FJ, Haier RJ, Lohr
J, Wu J, Potkin SG. Schizophrenics were significantly more hypofrontal than
the controls, with higher values on the 'parietal cortex and motor strip'
factor and a trend towards higher values in the temporal cortex. A canonical
discriminant analysis confirmed that the 'hypofrontality' and 'parietal cortex
and motor strip' factors accurately separated the schizophrenic group from the
healthy controls.

Schizophr Res 1996 Mar;19(1):41-53. Cerebral metabolic activity correlates of
subsyndromes in chronic schizophrenia. Schroder J, Buchsbaum MS, Siegel BV,
Geider FJ, Lohr J, Tang C, Wu J, Potkin SG. The delusional cluster showed a
significantly reduced hippocampal activity, while the negative symptoms
cluster presented with a prominent hypofrontality and significantly increased
left temporal cortex values.

Psychiatry Res 1997 Oct 31;75(3):131-44. Cerebral glucose metabolism in
childhood onset schizophrenia. Jacobsen LK, Hamburger SD, Van Horn JD,
Vaituzis AC, McKenna K, Frazier JA, Gordon CT, Lenane MC, Rapoport JL,
Zametkin AJ. Decreased frontal cortical glucose metabolism has been
demonstrated in adult schizophrenics both at rest and while engaging in tasks
that normally increase frontal metabolism, such as the Continuous Performance
Test (CPT).. These findings suggest that childhood onset schizophrenia may
be associated with a similar, but not more severe, degree of hypofrontality
relative to that seen in adult onset schizophrenia.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1990 Apr; 35(4):955-62. The effects of ondansetron, a
5-HT3 receptor antagonist, on cognition in rodents and primates. Barnes JM,
Costall B, Coughlan J, Domeney AM, Gerrard PA, Kelly ME, Naylor RJ, Onaivi ES,
Tomkins DM, Tyers MB. The selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, onansetron,
has been assessed in three tests of cognition in the mouse, rat and marmoset.
In a habituation test in the mouse, ondansetron facilitated performance in
young adult and aged animals, and inhibited an impairment in habituation
induced by scopolamine, electrolesions or ibotenic acid lesions of the nucleus
basalis magnocellularis. In an object discrimination and reversal learning
task in the marmoset, assessed using a Wisconsin General Test Apparatus,
ondansetron improved performance in a reversal learning task. We conclude that
ondansetron potently improves basal performance in rodent and primate tests of
cognition and inhibits the impairments in performance caused by cholinergic
deficits.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1992 May;42(1):75-83. Ondansetron and arecoline
prevent scopolamine-induced cognitive deficits in the marmoset. Carey GJ,
Costall B, Domeney AM, Gerrard PA, Jones DN, Naylor RJ, Tyers MB School of
Pharmacy, University of Bradford, UK. The cognitive-enhancing potential of the
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, ondansetron,
was investigated in a model of cognitive impairment induced by the muscarinic
receptor antagonist, scopolamine.

J Comp Physiol Psychol 1977 Jun;91(3): 642-8. Tryptophan and tonic immobility
in chickens: effects of dietary and systemic manipulations. Gallup GG Jr,
Wallnau LB, Boren JL, Gagliardi GJ, Maser JD, Edson PH. Systemic injections
of tryptophan, the dietary precursor to serotonin, led to a dose-dependent
increase in immobility, with optimal effects being observed within 30 min
after injection. Dietary depletion of endogenous tryptophan served to
attenuate the duration of immobility, and a diet completely free of
tryptophan, but supplemented with niacin, practically abolished the reaction.
Dietary replacement served to reinstate the response. The data are discussed
in light of evidence showing serotonergic involvement in tonic immobility.

J Neurosci Res 1995 Feb 15;40(3):407-413. Endotoxin administration stimulates
cerebral catecholamine release in freely moving rats as assessed by
microdialysis. Lavicky J, Dunn AJ.

J Neurosci Res 1998 Feb 15;51(4):517-525. Lipopolysaccharide regulates both
serotonin- and thrombin-induced intracellular calcium mobilization in rat C6
glioma cells: possible involvement of nitric oxide synthase-mediated pathway.
Tawara Y, Kagaya A, Uchitomi Y, Horiguchi J, Yamawaki S.

Infect Immun 1996 Dec;64(12):5290-5294..Biphasic, organ-specific, and strain-
specific accumulation of platelets induced in mice by a lipopolysaccharide
from Escherichia coli and its possible involvement in shock. Shibazaki M,
Nakamura M, Endo Y. "Platelets contain a large amount of 5-hydroxytryptamine
(5HT, serotonin). Intravenous injection into BALB/c mice of a Boivin's
preparation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Escherichia coli induced rapid
5HT accumulation in the lung (within 5 min) and slow 5HT accumulation in the
liver (2 to 5 h later)." "A shock, which was manifested by crawling,
convulsion, or prostration, followed shortly after the rapid accumulation of
5HT in the lung. On the other hand, the slow accumulation of 5HT in the liver
could be induced by much lower doses of LPS (1 microg/kg or less), even when
given by intraperitoneal injection."

Life Sci 1997;61(18):1819-1827. Serotonin 5HT2A receptor activation inhibits
inducible nitric oxide synthase activity in C6 glioma cells. Miller KJ,
Mariano CL, Cruz WR.

Harefuah 2000 May 15;138(10):809-12, 910. [Jet lag causing or exacerbating
psychiatric disorders]. Katz G, Durst R, Zislin J, Knobler H, Knobler HY. We
presume, relying on the literature and our accumulated experience, that in
predisposed individuals jet lag may play a role in triggering exacerbation of,
or de novo affective disorders, as well as, though less convincing,
schizophreniform psychosis or even schizophrenia. An illustrative case
vignette exemplifies the possible relationship between jet lag following
eastbound flight and psychotic manifestations.

Life Sci 1987 May 18;40(20):2031-9. Dysfunction in a prefrontal substrate of
sustained attention in schizophrenia. Cohen RM, Semple WE, Gross M, Nordahl
TE, DeLisi LE, Holcomb HH, King AC, Morihisa JM, Pickar D. Regional brain
metabolism was measured in normal subjects and patients with schizophrenia
while they performed an auditory discrimination task designed to emphasize
sustained attention. A direct relationship was found in the normal subjects
between metabolic rate in the middle prefrontal cortex and accuracy of
performance. The metabolic rate in the middle prefrontal cortex of patients
with schizophrenia, even those who performed as well as normals, was found to
be significantly lower than normal and unrelated to performance. The findings
point to a role of the mid-prefrontal region in sustained attention and to
dysfunction of this region in schizophrenia.

Acta Psychiatr Scand 1987 Dec;76(6):628-41. Regional brain glucose metabolism
in drug free schizophrenic patients and clinical correlates. Wiesel FA, Wik G,
Sjogren I, Blomqvist G, Greitz T, Stone-Elander S. Thus, the lower the
metabolic rate was, the more autistic the patient. Metabolic rates were not
correlated to atrophic changes of the brain. No basis for a specific
alteration in frontal cortical metabolism of schizophrenics was obtained.
Changes in regional metabolic rates in schizophrenia are suggested to reflect
disturbances in more general mechanisms which are of importance in neuronal
function.

Chung Hua Shen Ching Ching Shen Ko Tsa Chih 1991 Oct;24(5):268-71, 316-7.
[Developments observation of serum thyrohormone level in schizophrenics. Wang
X. The authors reported that abnormal levels of T4, FT4I in 16 cases patients
relate to disease course and severe symptoms and suggested that the change of
serum T4, FT4I in some cases was related to the disease in itself.

Biol Psychiatry 1991 Mar 1;29(5):457-66. Multidimensional hormonal
discrimination of paranoid schizophrenic from bipolar manic patients. Mason
JW, Kosten TR, Giller EL.

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1991;91(1):122-3 [Status of the
thyroid gland in patients with schizophrenia]. Turianitsa IM, Lavkai IIu,
Mishanich II, Margitich VM, Razhov KF. The rise of TTH concentration
represents one of the mechanisms of correction, aimed at the attainment of the
physiological content of T4 at the expense of its additional output for its
level in the blood serum is appreciably reduced.

Can J Psychiatry 1990 May;35(4):342-3. Increased detection of elevated TSH
using immunoradiometric assay. Little KY, Kearfott KS, Castellanos X, Rinker
A, Whitley R. Using a highly sensitive immunoradiometric assay, the authors
detected an increased rate of elevated thyrotropin in 2,099 patients vs 1,789
patients examined with radioimmunoassay. Closer scrutiny of mood disorder
patients with elevations found confirmatory evidence of thyroid dysfunction in
most.

Metabolism 1990 May;39(5):538-43. Serum thyrotropin in hospitalized
psychiatric patients: evidence for hyperthyrotropinemia as measured by an
ultrasensitive thyrotropin assay. Chopra IJ, Solomon DH, Huang TS.

J Nerv Ment Dis 1989 Jun;177(6):351-8. Serum thyroxine levels in schizophrenic
and affective disorder diagnostic subgroups. Mason JW, Kennedy JL, Kosten TR,
Giller EL Jr. For TT4, 75% of the PS group showed a rise during recovery in
contrast to 4% of the remaining groups; for FT4, 50% of the PS group showed a
rise compared with 14% of the other groups. This study emphasizes the
importance of exploring more fully the psychiatric significance of thyroxine
levels within the endocrinological normal range and of doing longitudinal
assessments of thyroxine and symptom changes during clinical recovery in
psychiatric disorders.

Biol Psychiatry 1989 Jan;25(1):67-74. Serum thyroxine change and clinical
recovery in psychiatric inpatients. Southwick S, Mason JW, Giller EL, Kosten
TR. A strong correlation between the range values for BPRS [Brief Psychiatric
Rating Scale] sum and for FT4 (p less than 0.005) and TT4 (p less than 0.001)
levels indicated that change in overall symptom severity was linked to change
in thyroxine levels during clinical recovery. These findings suggest that a
"normalizing" principle underlies the relationship between clinical recovery
and thyroxine levels and that both FT4 and TT4 levels within the normal range
appear to have clinical significance in either reflecting or contributing to
the course of a variety of psychiatric disorders and possibly having a role in
pathogenesis.

J Clin Psychiatry 1980 Sep;41(9):316-8. Myxedema psychosis--insanity defense
in homicide. Easson WM.

Int J Psychiatry Med 1988;18(3):263-70. The diagnostic dilemma of myxedema and
madness, axis I and axis II: a longitudinal case report. Darko DF, Krull A,
Dickinson M, Gillin JC, Risch SC. A patient with presumed chronic paranoid
schizophrenia had chronic thyroiditis and Grade I hypothyroidism. Psychosis
cleared following treatment with thyroid replacement. The differential
diagnosis among hypothyroidism and primary axis I psychotic and depressive
psychopathology has always been problematic.

P R Health Sci J 1993 Jun;12(2):85-7. [Alzheimer's disease: the untold story].
Pico-Santiago G. After considering the potential relationship between amyloid
deposits and myxedematous infiltrations, the hypothesis is formulated that
Alzheimer's disease may be due to functional hypothyroidism and may thus
respond to thyroid therapy.

Psychiatry Res 1998 Jul 27;80(1):29-39. Reduced level of plasma antioxidant
uric acid in schizophrenia. Yao JK, Reddy R, van Kammen DP. There is evidence
of dysregulation of the antioxidant defense system in schizophrenia. The
purpose of the present study was to examine whether uric acid, a potent
antioxidant, is reduced in the plasma of patients with schizophrenia. Male
schizophrenic patients with either a haloperidol treatment (n=47) or a drug-
free condition (n=35) had significantly lower levels of plasma uric acid than
the age- and sex-matched normal control subjects (n=34). In addition, the
plasma levels of uric acid in patient groups were significantly and inversely
correlated with psychosis. There was a trend for lower uric acid levels in
relapsed patients relative to clinically stable patients. Smoking, which can
modify plasma antioxidant capacity, was not found to have prominent effects on
uric acid levels. The present finding of a significant decrease of a selective
antioxidant provides additional support to the hypothesis that oxidative
stress in schizophrenia may be due to a defect in the antioxidant defense
system.

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1989; 89(5):108-10. [Lipid
peroxidation processes in patients with schizophrenia]. Kovaleva ES, Orlov ON,
Tsutsu'lkovskaia MIa, Vladimirova TV, Beliaev BS.

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1991;91(7):121-4. [Significance of
disorders of the processes of lipid peroxidation in patients with persistent
paranoid schizophrenia resistant to the treatment]. Govorin NV, Govorin AV,
Skazhutin SA.

Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter 1999 Jul-Sep;(3):19-22. [The biogenic amine content of
rat tissues in the postresuscitation period following hemorrhagic shock and
the effect of the preparation semax]. Bastrikova NA, Shestakova SV, Antonova
SV, Krushinskaia IaV, Goncharenko EN, Kudriashova NIu, Novoderzhkina IS,
Sokolova NA, Kozhura VL. Early after resuscitation the trend was noted to
higher LPO products concentration in plasma and serotonin in the brain stem.
It is suggested that biogenic amines, especially serotonin system, are
involved in mechanisms of postresuscitation disorders, in cerebral defects in
particular, through prolongation of secondary hypoxia early after hemorrhagic
shock and activation of hypothalamo-hypophyso-adrenal system late after the
shock.

Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1996 Aug;55(1-2):33-43. Free radical
pathology in schizophrenia: a review. Reddy RD, Yao JK.

Schizophr Res 1996 Mar;19(1):19-26. Impaired antioxidant defense at the onset
of psychosis. Mukerjee S, Mahadik SP, Scheffer R, Correnti EE, Kelkar H.

Biol Psychiatry 1998 May 1;43(9):674-9. Elevated plasma lipid peroxides at the
onset of nonaffective psychosis. Mahadik SP, Mukherjee S, Scheffer R, Correnti
EE, Mahadik JS.

Brain Res 1999 Aug 21;839(1):74-84. Psychological stress-induced enhancement
of brain lipid peroxidation via nitric oxide systems and its modulation by
anxiolytic and anxiogenic drugs in mice. Matsumoto K, Yobimoto K, Huong NT,
Abdel-Fattah M, Van Hien T, Watanabe H. The effects of diazepam and FG7142
were abolished by the BZD receptor antagonist flumazenil (10 mg/kg, i.p.).
These results indicate that psychological stress causes oxidative damage to
the brain lipid via enhancing constitutive NOS-mediated production of NO, and
that drugs with a BZD or 5-HT(1A) receptor agonist profile have a protective
effect on oxidative brain membrane damage induced by psychological stress.

Anesteziol Reanimatol 1998 Nov-Dec; (6):20-5. [Role of hyperbaric oxygenation
in the treatment of posthypoxic encephalopathy of toxic etiology]. Ermolov AS,
Epifanova NM, Romasenko MV, Luzhnikov EA, Ishmukhametov AI, Golikov PP,
Khvatov VB, Kukshina AA, Davydov BV, Kuksova NS, et al. Hyperbaric oxygenation
(HBO) was used in the treatment of 475 patients with toxic encephalopathy (TE)
developing as a result of exo- and endotoxicosis. HBO promoted correction of
all components of homeostasis, decreased endotoxicosis, reduced
psychopathological and neurological disorders, and promoted social adaptation.

J Neurochem 2000 Jan; 74(1): 114-24. Metabolic impairment elicits brain cell
type-selective changes in oxidative stress and cell death in culture. Park LC,
Calingasan NY, Uchida K, Zhang H, Gibson GE. Abnormalities in oxidative
metabolism and inflammation accompany many neurodegenerative diseases.
Thiamine deficiency (TD) is an animal model in which chronic oxidative stress
and inflammation lead to selective neuronal death, whereas other cell types
show an inflammatory response. Among the cell types tested, only in neurons
did TD induce apoptosis and cause the accumulation of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal, a
lipid peroxidation product. On the other hand, chronic lipopolysaccharide-
induced inflammation significantly inhibited cellular dehydrogenase and KGDHC
activities in microglia and astrocytes but not in neurons or endothelial
cells. The results demonstrate that the selective cell changes during TD in
vivo reflect inherent properties of the different brain cell types.

Psychol Med 1976 Aug;6(3):359-69. Possible association of schizophrenia with a
disturbance in prostaglandin metabolism: a physiological hypothesis. Feldberg
W. Schizophrenia may be associated with increased prostaglandin synthesis in
certain parts of the brain. This hypothesis is based on the following
findings: (1) Catalepsy, which is the nearest equivalent in animals to human
catatonia, develops in cats when prostaglandin E1 is injected into the
cerebral ventricles and when during endotoxin or lipid A fever the
prostaglandin E2 level in cisternal c.s.f. rises to high levels; however, when
fever and prostaglandin level are brought down by non-steroid anti-pyretics
which inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, catalepsy disappears as well. (2)
Febrile episodes are a genuine syndrome of schizophrenia.

Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1966;66(6):912-7. [Treatment of acute
schizophrenia with antibiotics, gamma-globulin and vitamins]. Neikoya M.

Prostaglandins Med 1979 Jan;2(1):77-80. Penicillin and essential fatty acid
supplementation in schizophrenia. Vaddadi KS.

Psychiatr Dev 1989 Spring;7(1):19-47. Positron emission tomography in
psychiatry. Wiesel FA. Schizophrenia is the most extensively studied
psychiatric disorder. Most studies have demonstrated decreased metabolic rates
in wide areas of the brain. It is proposed that the metabolic changes observed
in the brains of schizophrenic patients are due to a fundamental change in
neuronal function. Bipolar depressed patients probably have a decreased
brain metabolism. Alcohol dependent subjects with a long duration of abuse
may have a decreased brain metabolism.

Arch Gen Psychiatry 1976 Nov;33(11):1377-81. Platelet monamine oxidase in
chronic schizophrenia. Some enzyme characteristics relevant to reduced
activity. Murphy DL, Donnelly CH, Miller L, Wyatt RJ. These findings suggest
that the reduced MAO activity found in chronic schizophrenic patients is
apparently not accounted for by nonspecific changes in platelets or platelet
mitochondria.

Exp Neurol 1997 May;145(1):118-29. Long-term reciprocal changes in dopamine
levels in prefrontal cortex versus nucleus accumbens in rats born by Caesarean
section compared to vaginal birth. El-Khodor BF, Boksa P. Epidemiological
evidence indicates a higher incidence of pregnancy and birth complications
among individuals who later develop schizophrenia, a disorder linked to
alterations in mesolimbic dopamine (DA) function. Two birth complications
usually included in these epidemiological studies, and still frequently
encountered in the general population, are birth by Caesarean section
(C-section) and fetal asphyxia. At 2 months of age, in animals born by rapid
C-section, steady state levels of DA were decreased by 53% in the prefrontal
cortex and increased by 40% in both the nucleus accumbens and striatum, in
comparison to the vaginally born group. DA turnover increased in the
prefrontal cortex, decreased in the nucleus accumbens, and showed no
significant change in the striatum, in the C-section group. Thus, birth by a
Caesarean procedure produces long-term reciprocal changes in DA levels and
metabolism in the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex. Although
appearing robust at birth on gross observation, more subtle measurements
revealed that rat pups born by C-section show altered respiratory rates and
activity levels and increased levels of whole brain lactate, suggestive of low
grade brain hypoxia, during the first 24 h of life, in comparison to vaginally
born controls. It is concluded that C-section birth is sufficient
perturbation to produce long-lasting effects on DA levels and metabolism in
the central nervous system of the rat.

Rehabilitation (Stuttg) 1983 May;22(2):81-5 [Physical capacity of
schizophrenic patients]. Deimel H, Lohmann S. Reduced physical capacity in
schizophrenic illness has been described in medical literature, but so far not
been substantiated empirically. The findings of progressive bicycle ergometry
confirm the assertion, with the following main results having been obtained:
1. As opposed to a matched comparison group of untrained healthy clients, the
schizophrenically ill patients demonstrated significantly lower endurance
levels in respect of the aerobic-anaerobic threshold. 2\. Relative to the load
maximum attainable highly significant differences existed between the groups.
Particularly noteworthy had been early exercise termination already at
submaximal loads by the schizophrenic patients. 3\. The patients under study
obtained values one third below standard compared to the maximum load target
for untrained persons, with age and weight being taken into account.

Folia Psychiatr Neurol Jpn 1984;38(4):425-36 Antipsychotic and prophylactic
effects of acetazolamide (Diamox) on atypical psychosis. Inoue H, Hazama H,
Hamazoe K, Ichikawa M, Omura F, Fukuma E, Inoue K, Umezawa Y We investigated
the antipsychotic and prophylactic effects of acetazolamide (Diamox) on
atypical psychosis. Acetazolamide was given to 30 patients: Type I, puberal
periodic psychosis, a psychosis whose onset occurs during the period of
puberty and which appears repetitively with psychosis-like condition at about
the same interval as the menstrual cycle (6 cases); Type II, a) presenile
atypical psychosis which initially appears in patients in their 20s or 30s
accompanied by manic-depressive cycles and shows acute confusional and dreamy
states in the presenile period, incurable cases (7), b) atypical psychosis, in
the narrow sense, cases which show acute hallucination, delusion, confusional
and dreamy states accompanied by affective symptoms (8 cases); Type III,
repetitively the atypical manic and depressive states, and atypical manic-
depressive psychosis, and transient changes in consciousness, refractory cases
(2); Type IV, atypical schizophrenia, which is considered to be schizophrenia
but shows the abnormalities in electroencephalogram and emotional disorders (7
cases). Among these cases, some extent of the therapeutic effects of
acetazolamide (500-1,000 mg/day) was obtained in about 70%. The high
therapeutic effects were particularly observed in Types I, II and III. It was
less effective against atypical schizophrenia. Acetazolamide showed the
effectiveness in 10 cases out of 13 cases to which lithium carbonate and
carbamazepine were ineffective. The high therapeutic effects of acetazolamide
were shown in the cases whose symptoms were aggravated at the interval of the
menstrual cycle. No correlation was observed between the
electroencephalographic abnormalities and the therapeutic effects. In
addition, the prophylactic effects of acetazolamide on the periodic crisis
were observed in 9 cases. From these results, acetazolamide was considered to
have the antipsychotic and prophylactic effects on atypical psychosis. Since
side effects due to acetazolamide were rarely observed, the present drug was
considered to have a high safety margin.

Am J Psychiatry 1999 Apr;156(4):617-23 Minor physical anomalies,
dermatoglyphic asymmetries, and cortisol levels in adolescents with
schizotypal personality disorder. Weinstein DD, Diforio D, Schiffman J, Walker
E, Bonsall R. The schizotypal personality disorder group showed more minor
physical anomalies and dermatoglyphic asymmetries than the normal comparison
group and higher cortisol levels than both of the other groups.

Am J Psychiatry 1992 Jan;149(1):57-61 Congenital malformations and structural
developmental anomalies in groups at high risk for psychosis. McNeil TF,
Blennow G, Lundberg L. The inferred genetic risk for psychosis does not
appear to be associated with greater rates of early somatic developmental
anomalies, suggesting that early developmental anomalies do not represent an
expression of genetic influence toward psychosis.

Schizophr Bull 1984;10(2):204-32. Psychophysiological dysfunctions in the
developmental course of schizophrenic disorders. Dawson ME, Nuechterlein KH.
Two electrodermal anomalies are identified in different subgroups of
symptomatic patients: (1) an abnormally high sympathetic arousal and (2) an
abnormal absence of skin conductance orienting responses to innocuous
environmental stimuli.

Behav Brain Res 2000 Jan;107(1-2):71-83. Changes in adult brain and behavior
caused by neonatal limbic damage: implications for the etiology of
schizophrenia. Hanlon FM, Sutherland RJ. .This study contributes to our
understanding of the pathogenesis of schizophrenia by showing that early
damage to limbic structures produced behavioral, morphological, and
neuropharmacological abnormalities related to pathology in adult
schizophrenics.

Neurochem Res 1996 Sep; 21(9):995-1004. Mitochondrial involvement in
schizophrenia and other functional psychoses. Whatley SA, Curti D, Marchbanks
RM. Gene expression has been studied in post-mortem frontal cortex samples
from patients who had suffered from schizophrenia and depressive illness. We
conclude that changes in mitochondrial gene expression are involved in
schizophrenia and probably other functional psychoses.

Eur J Pharmacol 1994 Aug 11;261(1-2):25-32. The effect of alpha 2-adrenoceptor
antagonists in isolated globally ischemic rat hearts. Sargent CA, Dzwonczyk S,
Grover GJ. The alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist, yohimbine, has been reported
to protect hypoxic myocardium. Yohimbine has several other activities,
including 5-HT receptor antagonism, at the concentrations at which protection
was found. The cardioprotective effects of yohimbine were partially reversed
by 30 microM 5-HT. These results indicate that the mechanism for the
cardioprotective activity of yohimbine may involve 5-HT receptor antagonistic
activity.

J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1993 Oct;22(4):664-672. Protective effect of serotonin
(5-HT2) receptor antagonists in ischemic rat hearts. Grover GJ, Sargent CA,
Dzwonczyk S, Normandin DE, Antonaccio MJ.

J Appl Physiol 1994 Jul;77(1):277-284. Aerobic muscle contraction impaired by
serotonin-mediated vasoconstriction. Dora KA, Rattigan S, Colquhoun EQ, Clark
MG.

J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1995 Jul;15(4):706-13. Enhanced cerebrovascular
responsiveness to hypercapnia following depletion of central serotonergic
terminals. Kelly PA, Ritchie IM, McBean DE, Sharkey J, Olverman HJ.

Arch Gen Psychiatry 1984 Mar;41(3): 293-300. Regional brain glucose metabolism
in chronic schizophrenia. A positron emission transaxial tomographic study.
Farkas T, Wolf AP, Jaeger J, Brodie JD, Christman DR, Fowler JS. . . .
schizophrenics had significantly lower activity in the frontal lobes, relative
to posterior regions.

Semin Nucl Med 1986 Jan;16(1):2-34. Positron emission tomography imaging of
regional cerebral glucose metabolism. Alavi A, Dann R, Chawluk J, Alavi J,
Kushner M, Reivich M. In patients with Alzheimer's disease . . . parietal,
temporal, and to some degree, frontal glucose metabolism is significantly
diminished even in the early stages of the disease. Patients with Huntington's
disease and those at risk of developing this disorder have a typical pattern
of diminished CMRglu in the caudate nuclei and putamen. In patients with
stroke, PET images with FDG have demonstrated abnormal findings earlier than
either XCT or MRI and with a wider topographic distribution. FDG scans have
revealed interictal zones of decreased LCMRglu in approximately 70% of
patients with partial epilepsy. The location of the area of hypometabolism
corresponds to the site of the epileptic focus as determined by
electroencephalography and microscopic examination of the resected tissue.

Schizophr Bull 1988; 14(2): 169-76. From syndrome to illness: delineating the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia with PET. Cohen RM, Semple WE, Gross M,
Nordahl TE. In normal controls, the metabolic rate in the middle prefrontal
cortex, measured during the ongoing performance of auditory discrimination, is
associated with their accuracy of performance. In unmedicated patients with
schizophrenia, even those who performed as well as normals, the metabolic rate
in the mid-prefrontal cortex was found to be significantly lower than normal.
Further, this decreased metabolic rate was unrelated to performance. The
mid-prefrontal cortex and its dopamine neurotransmitter pathway input are
important biological determinants of sustained attention.

Biol Psychiatry 1989 Apr 1;25(7):835-51. Increased temporal lobe glucose use
in chronic schizophrenic patients. DeLisi LE, Buchsbaum MS, Holcomb HH,
Langston KC, King AC, Kessler R, Pickar D, Carpenter WT Jr, Morihisa JM,
Margolin R, et al. Temporal lobe glucose metabolic rate was assessed in 21
off-medication patients with schizophrenia and 19 normal controls by positron
emission tomography with 18F-deoxyglucose. Patients with schizophrenia had
significantly greater metabolic activity in the left than the right anterior
temporal lobe, and the extent of this lateralization was in proportion to the
severity of psychopathology.

Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999 Dec;181(6):1479-84. Stimulated nitric oxide release
and nitric oxide sensitivity in forearm arterial vasculature during
normotensive and preeclamptic pregnancy. Anumba DO, Ford GA, Boys RJ, Robson
SC. Alterations in serotonin receptor coupling to nitric oxide synthase, or a
limitation of availability of the substrate for nitric oxide synthase
(L-arginine) during pregnancy, could account for the reduction in stimulated
nitric oxide release.

J Hypertens 1999 Mar;17(3):389-96. U46619-mediated vasoconstriction of the
fetal placental vasculature in vitro in normal and hypertensive pregnancies.
Read MA, Leitch IM, Giles WB, Bisits AM, Boura AL, Walters WA.

Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999 Feb;180(2 Pt 1):371-7. Ketanserin versus
dihydralazine in the management of severe early-onset preeclampsia: maternal
outcome. Bolte AC, van Eyck J, Kanhai HH, Bruinse HW, van Geijn HP, Dekker GA.
Ketanserin [a selective serotonin 2 receptor blocker] is an attractive
alternative in the management of severe early-onset preeclampsia.

Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996 Dec;175(6):1543-50. Novel appearance of placental
nuclear monoamine oxidase: biochemical and histochemical evidence for
hyperserotonomic state in preeclampsia-eclampsia. Gujrati VR, Shanker K, Vrat
S, Chandravati, Parmar SS. Placental serotonin increases with severity
(rsystolic 0.84, rdiastolic 0.83) and monoamine oxidase decreases (rsystolic
0.86, rdiastolic 0.79). Placental monoamine oxidase showed marked changes in
preeclampsia-eclampsia. .A severity-dependent decrease was present in the
nuclei of placentas with preeclampsia-eclampsia. The study delineates an
impaired catabolism of placental serotonin in preeclampsia-eclampsia. The
novel appearance of monoamine oxidase in nuclei in proximity to its normal
site and low activity resulting in a hyperserotonomic state may lead to
preeclampsia-eclampsia.

Chung Hua Fu Chan Ko Tsa Chih 1996 Nov;31(11):670-2 [Changes of plasma levels
of monoamines in normal pregnancy and pregnancy-induced hypertension women and
their significance]. Lin B, Zhu S, Shao B. Compared with NP [normal
pregnant], the contents of DA in moderate and severe PIH [pregnancy-induced
hypertension] were markedly and very markedly decreased respectively (P < 0.05
and P < 0.01), while the levels of 5-HT in PIH increased significantly (P <
0.05). The changes of monoamines may be one of the causes of small artery
spasm in PIH.

Lancet 1997 Nov 1;350(9087):1267-71. Randomised controlled trial of ketanserin
and aspirin in prevention of pre-eclampsia. Steyn DW, Odendaal HJ. Pre-
eclampsia is associated with extensive endothelial-cell damage and platelet
activation, resulting in lower production of vasodilator prostaglandins and
increased release of the vasoconstrictors thromboxane A2 and serotonin. We
investigated the role of ketanserin, a selective serotonin-2-receptor
antagonist, in lowering the rate of pre-eclampsia among pregnant women with
mild to moderate hypertension. There were significantly fewer cases of pre-
eclampsia (two vs 13; relative risk 0.15 [95% CI 0.04-0.66], p = 0.006) and
severe hypertension (six vs 17; p = 0.02) in the ketanserin than in the
placebo group. There was also a trend towards less perinatal mortality (one vs
six deaths) but this was not significant (p = 0.28). Rates of abruptio
placentae and pre-eclampsia before 34 weeks' gestation were lower in the
ketanserin group, and mean birthweight was significantly higher.

Osaka City Med J 1989 Jun;35(1):1-11. Serotonin and tryptamine metabolism in
the acute hepatic failure model: changes in tryptophan and its metabolites in
the liver, brain and kidney. Kodama C, Mizoguchi Y, Kawada N, Sakagami Y, Seki
S, Kobayashi K, Morisawa S.

Br J Pharmacol 1984 Apr;81(4):645-650. Induction of hypoglycaemia and
accumulation of 5-hydroxytryptamine in the liver after the injection of
mitogenic substances into mice. Endo Y.

Eur J Pharmacol 1983 Aug 5;91(4):493-499. A lipopolysaccharide and
concanavalin A induce variations of serotonin levels in mouse tissues. Endo Y.

Brain Res 1986 Jul 16;378(1):164-8 5-Hydroxytryptamine-2 antagonist increases
human slow wave sleep. Idzikowski C, Mills FJ, Glennard R Ritanserin, a
specific 5-HT2 antagonist, was given to volunteers in a double-blind placebo
controlled sleep study. Slow wave sleep doubled in duration at the expense of
stage 2. The finding that a serotonin antagonist changed the architecture of
sleep without producing insomnia is of fundamental importance and calls for a
re-examination of traditional theories of sleep control which assign a
facilitatory role to serotonin.

Med Hypotheses 2000 Apr;54(4):645-7 Role of the pineal gland in hibernators: a
concept proposed to clarify why hibernators have to leave torpor and sleep.
Kocsard-Varo G.

Chronobiol Int 2000 Mar;17(2):103-28. The temporal organization of daily
torpor and hibernation: circadian and circannual rhythms. Kortner G, Geiser F.

Neuroreport 2000 Mar 20;11(4):881-5 Slow waves in the sleep
electroencephalogram after daily torpor are homeostatically regulated. Deboer
T, Tobler I.

Neuroendocrinology 1982 Jun; 34(6): 438-443. Sleep organization in hypo- and
hyperthyroid rats. Carpenter AC, Timiras PS. The results show an increased
number of awakenings during slow wave sleep (SWS) in hypothyroid animals,
whereas total sleep time, levels of SWS, paradoxical sleep, and diurnal
organization were unaffected by thyroid status. Our findings indicate that
adequate levels of thyroid hormone are necessary to sustain extended periods
of SWS in the adult rat while hyperthyroid animals show no disruption of sleep
organization. A corollary finding is that daily sleep quotas are independent
of whole body metabolic rates.

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

