![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Tissue-bound estrogen in aging**  
_

The "Estrogen Replacement" industry is based on the doctrine that a woman's
tissues are depleted of estrogen after menopause. This doctrine is false.

The concentration of a hormone in the blood doesn't directly represent the
concentration in the various organs.

The amount of estrogen in tissue is decreased when progesterone is abundant.
In the absence of progesterone, tissues retain estrogen even when there is
little estrogen circulating in the blood.

Many things suggest an increased estrogenic activity at menopause. For
example, melatonin decreases sharply at puberty when estrogen increases, and
then it decreases again at menopause. Prolactin (stimulated by estrogen)
increases around puberty, and instead of decreasing at menopause, it often
increases, and its increase is associated with osteoporosis and other age-
related symptoms.

Estrogen is produced in many tissues by the enzyme aromatase, even in the
breast and endometrium, although these are considered "target tissues" rather
than endocrine glands. Aromatase increases with aging.

Estrogen is inactivated, mainly in the liver and brain, by being made water
soluble by the attachment of glucuronic acid and/or sulfuric acid.

Estrogen's concentration in a particular tissue depends on many things,
including its affinity or binding strength for components of that tissue,
relative to its affinity for the blood; the activity in that tissue of the
aromatase enzyme, which converts androgens to estrogen; the activity of the
glucuronidase enzyme, that converts water-soluble estrogen glucuronides into
the oil soluble active forms of estrogen; and the sulfatases and several other
enzymes that modify the activity and solubility of the estrogens. The
"estrogen receptors," proteins which bind estrogens in cells, are inactivated
by progesterone, and activated by many physical and chemical conditions.

Inflammation activates beta-glucuronidase, and antiinflammatory substances
such as aspirin reduce many of estrogen's effects.

_

* * *

Doctrines are admitted into the "scientific canon" by those who have the power
of censorship. In astronomy, Halton Arp's discovery of "anomalous" galactic
red-shifts is practically unknown, because the journal editors say the
observations are "just anomalies," or that the theories which could explain
them are unconventional; but the actual problem is that they are strong
evidence against The Big Bang, Hubble's Law, and the Expanding Universe.
American science, since the 1940s, has probably been the most censored and
doctrinaire in the world.

Gilbert Ling's revolution in cell biology remains outside the canon, despite
the profound influence of MRI, which grew directly out of his view of the
cell, because his work provided conclusive evidence that cells are not
regulated by "semipermeable membranes and membrane pumps." Every field of
science is ruled by a doctrinaire establishment.

Charles E. Brown-Séquard (1817-94) was a physiologist who pioneered scientific
endocrinology, but who was ridiculed because of his claim that extracts of
animal glands had an invigorating effect when injected. His place in the
scientific canon is mainly as an object of ridicule, and the details of his
case are perfectly representative of the way our canon has been constructed.
The argument for dismissing his observations was that he used a water extract
of testicles, and, according to the 20th century American biologists,
testosterone is not water soluble, and so the water extract would have
contained no hormone. The argument is foolish, because living organs contain
innumerable substances that will solublize oily molecules, but also because
Brown-Sequard was describing an effect that wasnt necessarily limited to a
single chemical substance. (The transplanting of living cells to repair
tissues is finally being accepted, but the pioneers in promoting tissue
regeneration or repair with the transplantation of living, dead, or stressed
cells--V. Filatov, L.V. Polezhaev, W.T. Summerlin, for example--were simply
written out of history.)

If Brown-Séquards extract couldnt work because testosterone isnt soluble in
water, then what are we to think of the thousands of medical publications that
talk about free hormones as the only active hormones? (Free hormone is
defined as the hormone that isnt bound to a transporting protein, with the
more or less explicit idea that it is dissolved in the water of the plasma or
extracellular fluid.) Brown-Séquards tissue extracts would have contained
solublizing substances including proteins and phospholipids, so the oily
hormones would certainly be present (and active) in his extracts. But the
thousands of people who ridiculed him committed themselves to the fact that
steroid hormones are insoluble in water. By their own standard, they are
selling an impossibility when they do calculations to reveal the amount of
free hormone, as something distinct from the protein bound hormone, in the
patients blood.

The immense Hormone Replacement Therapy industry--which Brown-Séquards
experiments foreshadowed--is based on the fact that the concentrations of some
hormones in the blood serum decrease with aging.

At first, it was assumed that the amount of the hormone in the blood
corresponded to the effectiveness of that hormone. Whatever was in the blood
was being delivered to the target tissues. But as the idea of measuring
protein bound iodine (PBI) to determine thyroid function came into disrepute
(because it never had a scientific basis at all), new ideas of measuring
active hormones came into the marketplace, and currently the doctrine is
that the bound hormones are inactive, and the active hormones are free.
The free hormones are supposed to be the only ones that can get into the
cells to deliver their signals, but the problem is that free hormones exist
only in the imagination of people who interpret certain lab tests, as I
discussed in the newsletter on thyroid tests (May, 2000).

In the 1960s and 1970s, when the PBI test was disappearing, there was intense
interest in--a kind of mania regarding--the role of membranes in regulating
cell functions, and the membrane was still seen by most biologists as the
semipermeable membrane which, obviously, would exclude molecules as large
as albumin and the other proteins that carry thyroid and other hormones in the
blood. (In reality, and experimental observations, albumin and other proteins
enter cells more or less freely, depending on prevailing conditions.) The
membrane doctrine led directly to the free hormone doctrine.

This issue, of arguing about which form of a hormone is the active form, has
to do with explaining how much of the blood-carried hormone is going to get
into the target tissues. If the membrane is a semipermeable barrier to
molecules such as hormones, then specific receptors and transporters will be
needed. If the concentration of a hormone inside the cell is higher than that
in the blood, a pump will usually be invoked, to produce an active
transport of the hormone against its concentration gradient.

**But if the membrane regulates the passage of hormones from blood to tissue
cells, and especially if pumps are needed to move the hormone into the cell,
how relevant is the measurement of hormones in the blood?**

Within the blood, progesterone and thyroid hormone (T3) are much more
concentrated in the red blood cells than in the serum. Since it isnt likely
that red blood cells are targets for the sex hormones, or for progesterone
or even thyroid, their concentration against their gradient in these cells
suggests that a simple distribution by solubility is involved. Oily substances
just naturally tend to concentrate inside cells because of their insolubility
in the watery environment of the plasma and extracellular fluid. Proteins that
have oily regions effectively bind oily molecules, such as fats and
steroids. Even red blood cells have such proteins.

In the case of oil soluble molecules, such as progesterone and estrogen, its
important to explain that most of their binding to proteins or other oil-
loving molecules is really the nearly passive consequence of the molecules
being forced away from the watery phase--they are hydrophobic, and although it
would take a great amount of energy to make these insoluble substances enter
the watery phase, the attractive force between them and the cell is usually
small. This means that they can be freely mobile, while bound or
concentrated within the cell. The oxygen atoms, and especially the phenolic
group of estrogen, slightly reduce the hormones affinity for simple oils, but
they interact with other polar or aromatic groups, giving estrogen the ability
to bind more strongly and specifically with some proteins and other molecules.
Enzymes which catalyze estrogens oxidation-reduction actions are among the
specific estrogen-binding proteins.

Many proteins and lipoproteins bind steroids, but some intracellular proteins
bind them so strongly that they have been--in a very teleological, if not
anthropomorphic, way--considered as the switch by which the hormone turns on
the cellular response. In the popular doctrine of the Estrogen Receptor, a few
molecules of estrogen bind to the receptors, which carry them to the nucleus
of the cell, where the activated receptors turn on the genes in charge of the
female response. (Or the male response, or the growth response, or the atrophy
response, or whatever genetic response estrogen is producing.) Once the switch
has been thrown, the estrogen molecules have fulfilled their hormonal duty,
and must get lost, so that the response isnt perpetuated indefinitely by a
few molecules.

Although the Estrogen Receptor doctrine is worse than silly, there are real
proteins which bind estrogen, and some of these are called receptors. The
uterus, breast, and brain, which are very responsive to estrogen, bind, or
concentrate, estrogen molecules.

When I was working on my dissertation, I tried to extract estrogens from
hamster uteri, but the chemical techniques I was using to measure estrogen
werent accurate for such small quantities. A few years later, S. Batra was
able to extract the estrogen from human tissue in quantities large enough for
accurate analysis by radioimmunoassay. (Batra, 1976.)

His crucial observation was that the difference in estrogen concentration
between tissue and blood was lowest in the luteal phase, when progesterone is
high:

**The tissue/plasma ratio of E2 [estradiol] ranged from** **1.45 to 20.36
with very high values in early follicular phase and the lowest in mid-luteal
phase.** This means that progesterone prevents the tissue from concentrating
estrogen. He made similar observations during pregnancy, **with tissue
estrogen decreasing as blood progesterone increased, so that** **there is less
estrogen in the tissue than in the plasma.** But in women who arent pregnant,
and when their progesterone is low, the tissues may contain 20 to 30 times
more estrogen than the plasma (in equal volumes).

In aging, the sharply decreased progesterone production creates a situation
resembling the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, allowing tissues to
concentrate estrogen even when the serum estrogen may be low.

 **In postmenopausal women, the tissue concentration of E2 was not
significantly lower than in menstruating women in follicular phase. . . .** 
(Akerlund, et al., 1981.)

Besides the relatively direct actions of progesterone on the estrogen
receptors, keeping their concentration low, and its indirect action by
preventing prolactin from stimulating the formation of estrogen receptors,
there are many other processes that can increase or decrease the tissue
concentration of estrogen, and many of these influences change with aging.

There are two kinds of enzyme that produce estrogen. Aromatase converts male
hormones into estrogen. Beta-glucuronidase converts the inactive estrogen-
glucuronides into active estrogen. The healthy liver inactivates practically
all the estrogen that reaches it, mostly by combining it with the sugar
acid, glucuronic acid. This makes the estrogen water soluble, and it is
quickly eliminated in the urine. But when it passes through inflamed tissue,
these tissues contain large amounts of beta-glucuronidase, which will remove
the glucuronic acid, leaving the pure estrogen to accumulate in the tissue.

Many kinds of liver impairment decrease its ability to excrete estrogen, and
estrogen contributes to a variety of liver diseases. The work of the Biskinds
in the 1940s showed that a dietary protein deficiency prevented the liver from
detoxifying estrogen. Hypothyroidism prevents the liver from attaching
glucuronic acid to estrogen, and so increases the bodys retention of
estrogen, which in turn impairs the thyroid glands ability to secrete thyroid
hormone. Hypothyroidism often results from nutritional protein deficiency.

Although we commonly think of the ovaries as the main source of estrogen, the
enzyme which makes it can be found in all parts of the body. Surprisingly, in
rhesus monkeys, aromatase in the arms accounts for a very large part of
estrogen production. Fat and the skin are major sources of estrogen,
especially in older people. **The activity of aromatase increases with aging,
and under the influence of prolactin, cortisol, prostaglandin, and the
pituitary hormones, FSH (follicle stimulating hormone) and growth hormone.**
**It is inhibited by progesterone, thyroid, aspirin, and high altitude.**
Aromatase can produce estrogen in fat cells, fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells,
breast and uterine tissue, pancreas, liver, brain, bone, skin, etc. Its action
in breast cancer, endometriosis, uterine cancer, lupus, gynecomastia, and many
other diseases is especially important. Aromatase in mammary tissue appears to
increase estrogen receptors and cause breast neoplasia, independently of
ovarian estrogen (Tekmal, et al., 1999).

Women who have had their ovaries removed are usually told that they need to
take estrogen, but animal experiments consistently show that removal of the
gonads causes the tissue aromatases to increase. The loss of progesterone and
ovarian androgens is probably responsible for this generalized increase in the
formation of estrogen. In the brain, aromatase increases under the influence
of estrogen treatment.

Sulfatase is another enzyme that releases estrogen in tissues, and its
activity is inhibited by antiestrogenic hormones.

In at least some tissues, progesterone inhibits the release or activation of
beta-glucuronidase (which, according to Cristofalo and Kabakjian, 1975,
increases with aging). Glucaric acid, which inhibits this enzyme, is being
used to treat breast cancer, and glucuronic acid also tends to inhibit the
intracellular release of estrogen by beta-glucuronidase.

Although there is clearly a trend toward the rational use of antiestrogenic
treatments for breast cancer, in other diseases the myth of estrogen
deficiency still prevents even rudimentary approaches.

Ever since Lipshutz work in the 1940s, it has been established that the
**_uninterrupted_** effect of a little estrogen is more harmful than larger
but intermittent exposures. But after menopause, when progesterone stops its
cyclic displacement of estrogen from the tissues, the tissues retain large
amounts of estrogen continuously.

The menopause itself is produced by the prolonged exposure to estrogen
beginning in puberty, in spite of the monthly protection of the progesterone
produced by cycling ovaries. The unopposed action of the high concentration of
tissue-bound estrogen after menopause must be even more harmful.

The decline of the antiestrogenic factors in aging, combined with the increase
of pro-estrogenic factors such as cortisol and prolactin and FSH, occurs in
both men and women. During the reproductive years, womens cyclic production
of large amounts of progesterone probably retards their aging enough to
account for their greater longevity. Childbearing also has a residual
antiestrogenic effect and is associated with increased longevity.

Being aware of this pervasive increase in estrogen exposure with aging should
make it possible to marshal a comprehensive set of methods for opposing that
trend toward degeneration.  

**REFERENCES**  

Contraception 1981 Apr;23(4):447-55. **Comparison of plasma and myometrial
tissue concentrations of estradiol-17 beta and progesterone in nonpregnant
women.** Akerlund M, Batra S, Helm G Plasma and myometrial tissue
concentrations of estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P) were measured by
radioimmunoassay techniques in samples obtained from women with regular
menstrual cycles and from women in pre- **or postmenopausal age.** In women
with regular cycles, the tissue concentration of E2 ranged from 0.13 to 1.06
ng/g wet weight, with significantly higher levels around ovulation than in
follicular or luteal phases of the cycle. The tissue concentration of P ranged
from 2.06 to 14.85 ng/g wet weight with significantly higher level in luteal
phase than in follicular phase. The tissue/plasma ratio of E2 ranged from
**1.45 to 20.36 with very high values in early follicular phase and the lowest
in mid-luteal phase.** The ratio for P ranged from 0.54 to 23.7 and was
significantly lower in the luteal phase than in other phases of the cycle. One
woman in premenopausal age with an ovarian cyst was the only case with **a
tissue/plasma ratio of E2 Less Than 1, since her plasma E2 levels were
exceptionally high. In** **postmenopausal women, the tissue concentration of
E2 was not significantly lower than in menstruating women in follicular phase,
and the tissue concentration of P was not significantly lower than in fertile
women in any of the phases.** Neither in these women nor in menstruating women
was there **a close correlation between tissue and plasma levels.** The
present data indicate that the myometrial uptake capacity for ovarian steroids
may be saturated, **and also that a certain amount of these steroids is bound
to tissue even if plasma levels are low.**  

Biokhimiia 1984 Aug;49(8):1350-6. **[The nature of thyroid hormone receptors.
Translocation of thyroid hormones through plasma membranes].** Azimova ShS,
Umarova GD, Petrova OS, Tukhtaev KR, Abdukarimov A **The in vivo translocation
of thyroxine-binding blood serum prealbumin (TBPA) was studied. It was found
that the TBPA-hormone complex penetrates-through the plasma membrane into the
cytoplasm of target cells. Electron microscopic autoradiography revealed that
blood serum TBPA is localized in ribosomes of target cells as well as in
mitochondria, lipid droplets and Golgi complex. Negligible amounts of the
translocated TBPA is localized in lysosomes of the cells insensitive to
thyroid** hormones (spleen macrophages). Study of T4- and T3-binding proteins
from rat liver cytoplasm demonstrated that one of them has the antigenic
determinants common with those of TBPA. It was shown
autoimmunoradiographically that the structure of TBPA is not altered during
its translocation.  

**** Biokhimiia 1985 Nov;50(11):1926-32. **[The nature of thyroid hormone
receptors. Intracellular functions of thyroxine-binding prealbumin** ] Azimova
ShS; Normatov K; Umarova GD; Kalontarov AI; Makhmudova AA The effect of
tyroxin-binding prealbumin (TBPA) of blood serum on the template activity of
chromatin was studied. It was found that the values of binding constants of
TBPA for T3 and T4 are 2 X 10(-11) M and 5 X 10(-10) M, respectively. The
receptors isolated from 0.4 M KCl extract **of chromatin and mitochondria as
well as hormone-bound TBPA cause similar effects** on the template activity of
chromatin. Based on experimental results and the previously published
comparative data on the structure of TBPA, nuclear, cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial receptors of thyroid hormones as well as on **translocation
across the plasma membrane and intracellular transport of TBPA, a conclusion
was drawn, which suggested that TBPA is the "core" of the true thyroid hormone
receptor. It was shown that T3-bound TBPA caused histone H1-dependent
conformational changes in chromatin.** Based on the studies with the
interaction of the TBPA-T3 complex with spin-labeled chromatin, a scheme of
functioning of the thyroid hormone nuclear receptor was proposed.  

Biokhimiia 1984 Sep;49(9):1478-85 **[The nature of thyroid hormone receptors.
Thyroxine- and triiodothyronine-binding proteins of mitochondria]** Azimova
ShS; Umarova GD; Petrova OS; Tukhtaev KR; Abdukarimov A. T4- and T3-binding
proteins of rat liver were studied. It was found that the external
mitochondrial membranes and matrix contain a protein whose electrophoretic
mobility is similar to that of thyroxine-binding blood serum prealbumin (TBPA)
and which binds either T4 or T3. This protein is precipitated by monospecific
antibodies against TBPA. The internal mitochondrial membrane has two proteins
able to bind thyroid hormones, one of which is localized in the cathode part
of the gel and binds only T3, while the second one capable of binding T4
rather than T3 and possessing the electrophoretic mobility similar to that of
TBPA. Radioimmunoprecipitation with monospecific antibodies against TBPA
revealed that this protein also the antigenic determinants common with those
of TBPA. The in vivo translocation of 125I-TBPA into submitochondrial
fractions was studied. The analysis of densitograms of submitochondrial
protein fraction showed that both TBPA and hormones are localized in **the
same protein fractions. Electron microscopic autoradiography demonstrated that
125I-TBPA enters the cytoplasm through the external membrane and is localized
on the internal mitochondrial membrane and matrix.**  

Biokhimiia 1984 Aug;49(8):1350-6 **. [The nature of thyroid hormone receptors.
Translocation of thyroid hormones through plasma membranes]** Azimova ShS;
Umarova GD; Petrova OS; Tukhtaev KR; Abdukarimov A The in vivo translocation
of thyroxine-binding blood serum prealbumin (TBPA) was studied. It was found
that the TBPA-hormone complex penetrates-through the plasma membrane into the
cytoplasm of target cells. Electron microscopic autoradiography revealed that
blood serum TBPA is localized in ribosomes of target cells as well as in
mitochondria, lipid droplets and Golgi complex. Negligible amounts of the
translocated TBPA is localized in lysosomes of the cells insensitive to
thyroid hormones (spleen macrophages). Study of T4- and T3-binding proteins
from rat liver cytoplasm demonstrated that one of them has the antigenic
determinants common with those of TBPA. It was shown
autoimmunoradiographically that the structure of TBPA is not altered during
its translocation.  

Probl Endokrinol (Mosk), 1981 Mar-Apr, 27:2, 48-52. **[Blood estradiol level
and G2-chalone content in the vaginal mucosa in rats of different ages]**
Anisimov VN; Okulov VB. **17 beta-Estradiol level was higher in the blood
serum of rats aged 14 to 16 months with regular estral cycles during all the
phases as compared to that in 3- to 4-month-old female rats.** The latter ones
had a higher vaginal mucosa G2-chalone concentration. The level of the vaginal
mucosa G2-chalone decreased in young rats 12 hours after subcutaneous
benzoate-estradiol injection **. . . .** . Possible role of age-associated
disturbances of the **regulatory cell proliferation stimulant (estrogen) and
its inhibitor (chalone) interactions in neoplastic target tissue
transformation is discussed.**  

Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1979 Dec;11(6):603-10. **Interrelations between plasma
and tissue concentrations of 17 beta-oestradiol and progesterone during human
pregnancy.** Batra S, Bengtsson LP, Sjoberg NO Oestradiol and progesterone
concentration in plasma, decidua, myometrium and placenta obtained from women
undergoing Caesarian section at term and abortion at weeks 16-22 of pregnancy
were determined. There was a significant increase in oestradiol concentration
(per g wet wt) both in placenta, decidua and myometrium from mid-term to term.
**Both at mid-term and term oestradiol concentrations in decidua and
myometrium were much smaller than those in the plasma (per ml).** Progesterone
concentration in placenta and in myometrium did not increase from mid-term to
term where it increased significantly in decidua. **Decidual and myometrial
progesterone concentrations at mid-term were 2-3 times higher than those in
plasma,** but at term the concentrations in both these tissues were lower than
in plasma. The ratio **progesterone/oestradiol in plasma, decidua, myometrium
and placenta at mid-term was 8.7, 112.2, 61.4 and 370.0,** respectively, and
it decreased significantly in the myometrium and placenta but was nearly
unchanged in plasma and decidua at term. The general conclusion to be drawn
from the present study is **the lack of correspondence between the plasma
concentrations and the tissue concentrations of female sex steroids during
pregnancy.**  

Endocrinology 1976 Nov; 99(5): 1178-81. **Unconjugated estradiol in the
myometrium of pregnancy.** Batra S. By chemically digesting myometrium in a
mixture of NaOH and sodium dodecyl sulphate, estradiol could be recovered
almost completely by extraction with ethyl acetate. The concentration of
estradiol-17beta (E2) in the extracted samples could reliably be determined by
radioimmunoassay. Compared to its concentration in the plasma, E2 in the
pregnant human myometrium was very low, and as a result, the tissue/plasma
estradiol concentration ratio was less than 0.5. In the pseudopregnant rabbit,
this ratio ranged between 16 and 20.  

J Steroid Biochem 1989 Jan;32(1A):35-9. **Tissue specific effects of
progesterone on progesterone and estrogen receptors in the female urogenital
tract.** Batra S, Iosif CS. The effect of progesterone administration on
progesterone and estrogen receptors in the uterus, vagina and urethra of
rabbits was studied. After 24 h of **progesterone treatment the concentration
of cytosolic progesterone receptors decreased to about 25% of the control
value in the uterus, whereas no significant change in receptor concentration
was observed in the vagina or the urethra. The concentration of the nuclear
progesterone receptor did not change in any of the three tissues studied. The
apparent dissociation constant (Kd) of nuclear progesterone receptor increased
after progesterone treatment in all** three tissues. Although the Kd of the
cytosolic progesterone receptor also increased in all tissues, the difference
was significant for only the vagina and **urethra. The concentration of
cytosolic estrogen receptors in the uterus decreased significantly (P less
than 0.001) after progesterone treatment whereas the Kd value increased
slightly (P less than 0.05). In vagina or the urethra,** there was no change
in either estrogen receptor concentration or Kd values after progesterone
treatment. These data clearly showed that the reduction by progesterone of
progesterone and estrogen receptor concentrations occurs only in the uterus
and not in the vagina or the urethra.  

Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980 Apr 15;136(8):986-91. **Female sex steroid
concentrations in the ampullary and isthmic regions of the human fallopian
tube and their relationship to plasma concentrations during the menstrual
cycle.** Batra S, Helm G, Owman C, Sjoberg NO, Walles B. The concentrations of
estradiol-17 beta (E2) and progesterone (P) were measured in the ampullary and
isthmic portions of the fallopian tube of nonpregnant menstruating women and
the cyclic fluctuations were related to the concentrations of these hormones
in plasma. The steroid concentrations were determined by radioimmunoassays.
There was no significant difference in the isthmic and ampullary
concentrations of either steroid in any of the menstrual phases. The mean
value for E2 was highest in the ovulatory phase and for P during the luteal
phase. The tissue (per gm)/plasma (per ml) ratio for the steroid
concentrations was above unity in all measurements. The ratio for E2 was
highest (isthmus:12, ampulla:8) in the follicular phase and for P (isthmus:26,
ampulla:18) during ovulation. Since **these highest ratios were attained when
plasma steroid concentrations were relatively low they were interpreted as
reflections of a maximal receptor contribution.**  

Biol Reprod 1980 Apr;22(3):430-7. **Sex steroids in plasma and reproductive
tissues of the female guinea pig.** Batra S, Sjoberg NO, Thorbert G.  

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1997 Apr;61(3-6):323-39. **Steroid control and
sexual differentiation of brain aromatase.** Balthazart J. Together, these
data indicate that **the removal of estrogens caused by steroidal inhibitors
decreases the synthesis of ARO,** presumably at the transcriptional level.  

Science, Vol. 94, No. 2446 (Nov. 1941), p. 462. **Diminution in Ability of the
Liver to Inactivate Estrone in Vitamin B Complex Deficiency,** Biskind, M.S.,
and G. R. Biskind.  

Am. Jour. Clin. Path., Vol. 16 (1946), No. 12, pages 737-45. **The Nutritional
Aspects of Certain Endocrine Disturbances,** Biskind, G. R., and M. S.
Biskind. ****  

Biol Reprod, 1993 Oct, 49:4, 647-52 **. Pathologic effect of estradiol on the
hypothalamus.** Brawer JR; Beaudet A; Desjardins GC; Schipper HM. Estradiol
provides physiological signals to the brain throughout life that are
indispensable for the development and regulation of reproductive function. In
addition to its multiple physiological actions, we have shown that estradiol
is also selectively cytotoxic to beta-endorphin neurons in the hypothalamic
arcuate nucleus. The mechanism underlying this neurotoxic action appears to
involve the conversion of estradiol to catechol estrogen and subsequent
oxidation to o-semiquinone free radicals. The estradiol-induced loss of beta-
endorphin neurons engenders a compensatory increment in mu opioid binding in
the medial preoptic area rendering this region supersensitive to residual
beta-endorphin or to other endogenous opioids. The consequent persistent
opioid inhibition results in a cascade of neuroendocrine deficits that are
ultimately expressed as a chronically attenuated plasma LH pattern to which
the ovaries respond by becoming anovulatory and polycystic. This neurotoxic
action of estradiol may contribute to a number of reproductive disorders in
humans and in animals in which aberrant hypothalamic function is a major
component.  

Mech Ageing Dev, 1991 May, 58:2-3, 207-20. **Exposure to estradiol impairs
luteinizing hormone function during aging.** Collins TJ; Parkening TA
Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston 77550. This work evaluated the anterior pituitary (AP) component of
the H-P axis by determining the ability of perifused AP to release LH
following sustained but pulsatile LHRH stimulation. The normal dual discharge
profile of LH was affected by age. **The role of estradiol (E2) in AP aging
was further tested as AP from ovariectomized (OVXed) mice, deprived of E2
since puberty, responded as well as the mature proestrous group. In contrast,
aged mice subjected to long-term E2 exposure (cycling or OVXed plus E2
replacement) failed to produce the dual response pa** ttern. Furthermore,
**E2 is a major factor in altering LH function and appears to act before
middle age.**  

Mech Ageing Dev 1975 Jan-Feb;4(1):19-28. **Lysosomal enzymes and aging in
vitro: subcellular enzyme distribution and effect of hydrocortisone on cell
life-span.** Cristofalo VJ, Kabakjian J. The acid phosphatase and beta
glucuronidase activities of four subcellular fractions (nuclear,
mitochondrial-lysosomal, microsomal, supernatant) of WI-38 cells were compared
during in vitro aging. A **ll of the fractions showed an age-associated
increase in activity.**   

Endocrinology, 1992 Nov, 131:5, 2482-4. **Vitamin E protects hypothalamic
beta-endorphin neurons from estradiol neurotoxicity.** Desjardins GC; Beaudet
A; Schipper HM; Brawer JR. Estradiol valerate (EV) treatment has been shown to
result in the destruction of 60% of beta-endorphin neurons in the hypothalamic
arcuate nucleus. Evidence suggests that the mechanism of EV-induced
neurotoxicity involves the conversion of estradiol to catechol estrogen and
subsequent oxidation to free radicals in local peroxidase-positive astrocytes.
In this study, we examined whether treatment with the antioxidant, vitamin E,
protects beta-endorphin neurons from the neurotoxic action of estradiol. Our
results demonstrate that chronic vitamin E treatment prevents the decrement in
hypothalamic beta-endorphin concentrations resulting from arcuate beta-
endorphin cell loss, suggesting that the latter is mediated by free radicals.
Vitamin E treatment also prevented the onset of persistent vaginal
cornification and polycystic ovarian condition which have been shown to result
from the EV-induced hypothalamic pathology.  

Exp Gerontol, 1995 May-Aug, 30:3-4, 253-67. **Estrogen-induced hypothalamic
beta-endorphin neuron loss: a possible model of hypothalamic aging.**
Desjardins GC; Beaudet A; Meaney MJ; Brawer JR. Over the course of normal
aging, all female mammals with regular cycles display an irreversible arrest
of cyclicity at mid-life. Males, in contrast, exhibit gametogenesis until
death. **Although it is widely accepted that exposure to estradiol throughout
life contributes to reproductive aging, a unified hypothesis of the role of
estradiol in reproductive senescence has yet to emerge.** Recent evidence
derived from a rodent model of chronic estradiol-mediated accelerated
reproductive senescence now suggests such a hypothesis. It has been shown that
chronic estradiol exposure results in the **destruction of greater than 60% of
all beta-endorphin neurons in the arcuate nucleus** while leaving other
neuronal populations spared. This loss of opioid neurons is prevented by
treatment with antioxidants indicating that it results from **estradiol-
induced formation of free radicals. Furthermore, we have shown that this beta-
endorphin cell loss is followed by a compensatory upregulation of mu opioid
receptors in the vicinity of LHRH cell bodies.** The increment in mu opioid
receptors presumably renders the opioid target cells supersensitive to either
residual beta-endorphin or other endogenous mu ligands, such as met-
enkephalin, thus resulting in chronic opioid **suppression of the pattern of
LHRH release, and subsequently that of LH.** Indeed, prevention of the
neuroendocrine effects of estradiol by antioxidant treatment also **prevents
the cascade of neuroendocrine aberrations resulting in anovulatory
acyclicity.** The loss of beta-endorphin neurons along with the paradoxical
opioid supersensitivity which ensues, provides a unifying framework in which
to interpret the diverse features that characterize the reproductively
senescent female.  

Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd 1994 Jun; 54(6):321-31. **Hormonprofile bei
hochbetagten Frauen und potentielle Einflussfaktoren.** Eggert-Kruse W; Kruse
W; Rohr G; Muller S; Kreissler-Haag D; Klinga K; Runnebaum B. **[Hormone
profile of elderly women and potential modifiers].** Eggert-Kruse W, Kruse W,
Rohr G, Muller S, Kreissler-Haag D, Klinga K, Runnebaum B. In 136 women with
a median age of 78 (60-98) years the serum concentrations of FSH, LH,
prolactin, estradiol-17 beta, testosterone and DHEA-S were determined
completed by GnRH and ACTH stimulation tests in a subgroup. This resulted in
median values for FSH of 15.8 ng/ml, LH 6.4 ng/ml, prolactin 6.9 ng/ml,
estradiol 16 pg/ml, testosterone 270 pg/ml and 306 ng/ml for DHEA-S. **No
correlation with age in this population was found for gonadotropins as well as
the other hormones for an age level of up to 98 years.**  

Acta Physiol Hung 1985;65(4):473-8. **Peripheral blood concentrations of
progesterone and oestradiol during human pregnancy and delivery.** Kauppila A,
Jarvinen PA To evaluate the significance of progesterone and estradiol in
human uterine activity during pregnancy and delivery the blood concentrations
of these hormones were monitored weekly during the last trimester of pregnancy
and at the onset of labour in 15 women, and before and 3 hours after the
induction of term delivery in 83 parturients. Neither plasma concentrations of
progesterone or estradiol nor the ratio of progesterone to estradiol changed
significantly during the last trimester of pregnancy or at the onset of
delivery. After the **induction of delivery parturients with initial
progesterone dominance (ratio of progesterone to estradiol higher than 5
before induction) demonstrated a significant fall in serum concentration of
progesterone and in the ratio of progesterone to estradiol while estradiol
concentration rose significantly. In estrogen dominant women (progesterone to
estradiol ratio equal to or lower than 5) the serum concentration of
progesterone and the ratio of progesterone to** estradiol rose significantly
during the 3 hours after the induction of delivery. Our results suggest that
the peripheral blood levels of progesterone and estradiol do not correlate
with the tissue biochemical changes which prepare the uterine cervix and
myometrium for delivery. The observation that the ratio of progesterone to
estradiol decreased in progesterone-dominant and increased in estrogen-
dominant women stresses the importance of a well balanced equilibrium of these
hormones for prostaglandin metabolism during human delivery.  

Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984 Nov 1;150(5 Pt 1):501-5. **Estrogen and progesterone
receptor and hormone levels in human myometrium and placenta in term
pregnancy.** Khan-Dawood FS, Dawood MY. Estradiol and progesterone receptors
in the myometrium, decidua, placenta, chorion, and amnion of eight women who
underwent elective cesarean section at term were determined by means of an
exchange assay. The hormone levels in the peripheral plasma and cytosol of
these tissues were measured by radioimmunoassays. Maternal plasma and the
placenta had high concentrations of estradiol and progesterone, with the
placenta having 12 times more progesterone **than in maternal plasma but only
half the concentrations of estradiol in** maternal plasma. The decidua and
placenta had detectable levels of cytosol and nuclear estradiol receptors, but
the myometrium had no measurable cytosol estradiol receptors, **whereas the
chorion and amnion had neither cytosol nor nuclear estradiol receptors.
However, the chorion and amnion had significantly higher concentrations of
estradiol** in the cytosol than those in the decidua and myometrium. Only the
decidua and myometrium had cytosol and nuclear progesterone receptors, but the
placenta, amnion, and chorion had neither cytosol nor nuclear progesterone
receptors. In contrast, progesterone hormone levels were significantly higher
in the placenta, amnion, and chorion than in the decidua and myometrium. The
findings indicate that, in the term pregnant uterus, (1) the placenta, amnion,
and chorion are rich in progesterone, estradiol, and nuclear estradiol
receptors but have no progesterone receptors, (2) the decidua and myometrium
have nuclear estradiol and progesterone receptors, and (3) **the myometrium
has a higher progesterone/estradiol ratio than that of the peripheral plasma,
thus suggesting a highly progesterone-dominated uterus.**  

Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1982 Jan 29;104(2):570-6. **Progesterone-induced
inactivation of nuclear estrogen receptor in the hamster uterus is mediated by
acid phosphatase.** MacDonald RG, Okulicz WC, Leavitt, W.W.  

Steroids 1982 Oct;40(4):465-73. **Progesterone-induced estrogen receptor-
regulatory factor is not 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.** MacDonald RG,
Gianferrari EA, Leavitt WW These studies were done to determine if the
progesterone-induced estrogen receptor-regulatory factor (ReRF) in hamster
uterus is 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17 beta-HSD), i.e. that rapid
loss of nuclear estrogen receptor (Re) might be due to enhanced estradiol
oxidation to estrone catalyzed by 17 beta-HSD. Treatment of proestrous
hamsters with progesterone (approximately 25 mg/kg BW) for either 2 h or 4 h
had no effect on 17 beta-HSD activity measured as the rate of conversion of
[6,7-3H]estradiol to [3H]estrone by whole uterine homogenates at 35 degrees C.
During this same time interval, progesterone treatment increased the rate of
inactivation of the occupied form of nuclear Re as determined during a 30 min
incubation of uterine nuclear extract in vitro at 36 degrees C. Since we
previously demonstrated that such in vitro Re-inactivating activity represents
ReRF, the present studies show that ReRF is not 17 beta-HSD or a modifier of
that enzyme.  

Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987 Aug; 157(2):312-317. **Age-related changes in the
female hormonal environment during reproductive life.** Musey VC, Collins DC,
Musey PI, Martino-Saltzman D, Preedy JR Previous studies have indicated that
serum levels of follicle-stimulating hormone rise with age during the female
reproductive life, but the effect on other hormones is not clear. We studied
the effects of age, independent of pregnancy, by comparing serum hormone
levels in two groups of nulliparous, **premenopausal women aged 18 to 23 and
29 to 40 years. We found that increased age during reproductive life is
accompanied by a significant rise in both basal and stimulated serum follicle-
stimulating hormone levels. This was accompanied by an increase in the serum
level of estradiol-17 beta and the urine** levels of estradiol-17 beta and 17
beta-estradiol-17-glucosiduronate. The serum level of estrone sulfate
decreased with age. Serum and urine levels of other estrogens were unchanged.
The basal and stimulated levels of luteinizing hormone were also unchanged.
There was a significant decrease in basal and stimulated serum prolactin
levels. Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate decreased with age, but serum testosterone was unchanged. It is
concluded that significant age-related changes in the female hormonal
environment occur during the reproductive years.  

Endocrinology 1981 Dec;109(6):2273-5. **Progesterone-induced estrogen
receptor-regulatory factor in hamster uterine nuclei: preliminary
characterization in a cell-free system.** Okulicz WC, MacDonald RG, Leavitt
WW. **In vitro studies have demonstrated a progesterone-induced activity
associated with the uterine nuclear fraction which resulted in the loss of
nuclear estrogen receptor.** This progesterone-dependent stimulation of
estrogen receptor loss was absent when nuclear extract was prepared in
phosphate buffer rather than Tris buffer. In addition, sodium molybdate and
sodium metavanadate (both at 10 mM) inhibited this activity in nuclear
extract. These observations support the hypothesis that progesterone
modulation of estrogen action may be accomplished by induction (or activation)
of an estrogen receptor-regulatory factor (Re-RF), and this factor may in turn
**act to eliminate the occupied form of estrogen receptor from the nucleus,**
perhaps through a hypothetical dephosphorylation-inactivation mechanism.  

American Journal of Human Biology, v.8, n.6, (1996): 751-759. **Ovarian
function in the latter half of the reproductive lifespan.** O'Rourke, M T;
Lipson, S F; Ellison, P T. Thus, ovarian endocrine function over the course
of reproductive life represents a process of change, but not one of
generalized functional decline.  

J Gerontol, 1978 Mar, 33:2, 191-6. **Circulating plasma levels of
pregnenolone, progesterone, estrogen, luteinizing hormone, and follicle
stimulating hormone in young and aged C57BL/6 mice during various stages of
pregnancy.** Parkening TA; Lau IF; Saksena SK; Chang MC Young (3-5 mo of age)
and senescent (12-15 mo of age) multiparous C57BL/6 mice were mated with young
males (3-6 mo of age) and the numbers of preimplantation embryos and
implantation sites determined on days 1 (day of plug), 4, 9, and 16 of
pregnancy. The numbers of viable embryos were significantly lower (p less than
0.02 to p less than 0.001) in senescent females compared with young females on
all days except day 1 of pregnancy. Plasma samples tested by radioimmunoassay
indicated circulating estradiol-17B was significantly lower (P less than 0.05)
on day 1 and **higher (p less than 0.05) on day 4** in older females, whereas
FSH was higher on days 4, 9, and 16 (p less than 0.02 to p less than 0.001) in
senescent females when compared with samples from young females. Levels of
pregnenolone, progesterone, estrone, and LH were not significantly different
at any stage of pregnancy in the two age groups. From the hormonal data it did
not appear that degenerating corpora lutea were responsible for the declining
litter size in this strain of aged mouse.  

Biol Reprod, 1985 Jun, 32:5, 989-97. **Orthotopic ovarian transplantations in
young and aged C57BL/6J mice.** Parkening TA; Collins TJ; Elder FF.
Orthotopic ovarian transplantations were done between young (6-wk-old) and
aged (17-mo-old) C57BL/6J mice. The percentages of mice mating following
surgery from the four possible ovarian transfer combinations were as follows:
young into young, 83%; **young into aged, 46%;** aged into young, 83%; and
aged into aged, 36%. **The only statistical differences found between the
transfer groups occurred in FSH concentrations. Plasma FSH was markedly
elevated (P less than 0.005) in young recipients with ovaries transplanted
from aged donors, in comparison to young recipients with ovaries from young
donors.** These data indicate that the aging ovary and uterus play a secondary
role in **reproductive failure and that the aging hypothalamic-hypophyseal
complex is primarily responsible for the loss of fecundity in older female
C57BL/6J mice.**  

J Endocrinol, 1978 Jul, 78:1, 147-8. **Postovulatory levels of progestogens,
oestrogens, luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone in the plasma
of aged golden hamsters exhibiting a delay in fertilization.** Parkening TA;
Saksena SK; Lau IF.  

Biology of Reproduction, v.49, n.2, (1993): 387-392. **Controlled neonatal
exposure to estrogens: A suitable tool for reproductive aging studies in the
female rat.** Rodriguez, P; Fernandez-Galaz, C; Tejero, A. The present study
was designed to determine whether the modification of exposure time to large
doses of estrogens provided a reliable model for early changes in reproductive
aging. Premature occurrence of vaginal opening was observed in all three
estrogenized groups independently of EB exposure. However, females bearing
implants for 24 h had first estrus at the same age as their controls and
cycled regularly, and neither histological nor gonadal alterations could be
observed at 75 days. Interestingly, they failed to cycle regularly at 5 mo
whereas controls continued to cycle. On the other hand, the increase of EB
exposure (Ei5, EI) resulted in a gradual and significant delay in the onset of
first estrus and in a high number of estrous phases, as frequently observed
during reproductive decline. At 75 days, the ovaries of these last two groups
showed a reduced number of corpora lutea and **an increased number of large
follicles**. According to this histological pattern, ovarian weight and
progesterone (P) content gradually decreased whereas both groups showed higher
estradiol (E-2) content than controls. This resulted in **a higher E-2:P
ratio, comparable to that observed in normal aging rats.** **The results allow
us to conclude that the exposure time to large doses of estrogens is critical
to the gradual enhancement of reproductive decline. Furthermore, exposures as
brief as 24 h led to a potential early model for aging studies that will be
useful to verify whether neuroendocrine changes precede gonadal impairment.**  

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996 Apr;81(4):1495-501. **Characterization of
reproductive hormonal dynamics in the perimenopause.** Santoro N, Brown JR,
Adel T, Skurnick JH.  **Overall mean estrone conjugate excretion was**
**greater in the perimenopausal women compared to that in the younger women
[76.9 ng/mg Cr (range, 13.1-135) vs. 40.7 ng/mg Cr (range, 22.8-60.3); P =
0.023]** **and was similarly elevated in both follicular and luteal phases.**
**Luteal phase pregnanediol excretion was diminished in the perimenopausal
women** compared to that in younger normal subjects (range for integrated
pregnanediol, **1.0-8.4 vs. 1.6-12.7** microg/mg Cr/luteal phase; P = 0.015).
We **conclude that altered ovarian function in the perimenopause can be
observed as early as age 43 yr and include hyperestrogenism,
hypergonadotropism, and decreased luteal phase progesterone excretion. These
hormonal alterations may well be responsible for the increased gynecological
morbidity that characterizes this period of life.**  

Brain Res, 1994 Jul 25, 652:1, 161-3. **The 21-aminosteroid antioxidant,
U74389F, prevents estradiol-induced depletion of hypothalamic beta-endorphin
in adult female rats.** Schipper HM; Desjardins GC; Beaudet A; Brawer JR. **A
single intramuscular injection of 2 mg estradiol valerate (EV) results in
neuronal degeneration and beta-endorphin depletion in the hypothalamic arcuate
nucleus of adult female rats. The present findings support the hypothesis
that the toxic effect of estradiol on hypothalamic beta-endorphin neurons is
mediated by free radicals.**  

Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 2000;27(1):54-6. **Hormonal reproductive status of
women at menopausal transition compared to that observed in a group of
midreproductive-aged women.** Sengos C, Iatrakis G, Andreakos C, Xygakis A,
Papapetrou P. **CONCLUSION: The reproductive hormonal patterns in**
**perimenopausal women favor a relatively hypergonadotropic hyper-estrogenic
milieu.**  

Endocr Relat Cancer 1999 Jun;6(2):307-14. **Aromatase overexpression and
breast hyperplasia, an in vivo model--continued overexpression of aromatase is
sufficient to maintain hyperplasia without circulating estrogens, and
aromatase inhibitors abrogate these preneoplastic changes in mammary glands.**
Tekmal RR, Kirma N, Gill K, Fowler K To test directly the role of breast-
tissue estrogen in initiation of breast cancer, we have developed the
aromatase-transgenic mouse model and demonstrated for the first time that
increased mammary estrogens resulting from the overexpression of aromatase in
mammary glands lead to the induction of various preneoplastic and neoplastic
changes that are similar to early breast cancer. Our current studies show
aromatase overexpression is sufficient to induce and maintain early
preneoplastic and neoplastic changes in female mice without circulating
ovarian estrogen. Preneoplastic and neoplastic changes induced in mammary
glands as a result of aromatase overexpression can be completely abrogated
with the administration of the aromatase inhibitor, letrozole. Consistent with
complete reduction in hyperplasia, **we have also seen downregulation of
estrogen receptor and a decrease in cell proliferation** markers, suggesting
aromatase-induced hyperplasia can be treated with aromatase inhibitors. Our
studies demonstrate that **aromatase overexpression alone, without circulating
estrogen, is responsible for the induction of breast hyperplasia and these
changes can be abrogated using aromatase inhibitors.**  

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2000 Jun;73(3-4):141-5. **Elevated steroid
sulfatase expression in breast cancers.** Utsumi T, Yoshimura N, Takeuchi S,
Maruta M, Maeda K, Harada N. In situ estrogen synthesis makes an important
contribution to the high estrogen concentration found in breast cancer
tissues. Steroid sulfatase which hydrolyzes several sulfated steroids such as
estrone sulfate, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and cholesterol sulfate may
be involved. In the present study, we therefore, assessed steroid sulfatase
mRNA levels in breast malignancies and background tissues from 38 patients by
reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction. The levels in breast
cancer tissues were significantly increased at 1458.4+/-2119.7 attomoles/mg
RNA (mean +/- SD) as compared with 535.6+/-663.4 attomoles/mg RNA for non-
malignant tissues (P<0.001). Thus, increased steroid sulfatase expression may
be partly responsible for local overproduction of estrogen and provide a
growth advantage for tumor cells.  

Ann N Y Acad Sci 1986;464:106-16. **Uptake and concentration of steroid
hormones in mammary tissues.** Thijssen JH, van Landeghem AA, Poortman J In
order to exert their biological effects, steroid hormones must enter the cells
of target tissues and after binding to specific receptor molecules must remain
for a prolonged period of time in the nucleus. Therefore the endogenous levels
and the subcellular distribution of estradiol, estrone, DHEAS, DHEA ad 5-Adiol
were measured in normal breast tissues and in malignant and nonmalignant
breast tumors from pre- and postmenopausal women. For estradiol the highest
tissue levels were found in the malignant samples **. No differences were seen
in these levels between pre- and postmenopausal women despite the largely
different peripheral blood levels.** For estrone no differences were found
between the tissues studied. Although the estradiol concentration was higher
in the estradiol-receptor-positive than in the receptor-negative tumors, no
correlation was calculated between the estradiol and the receptor consent.
Striking differences were seen between the breast and uterine tissues for the
total tissue concentration of estradiol, the ratio between estradiol and
estrone, and the subcellular distribution of both estrogens. **At similar
receptor concentrations in the tissues these differences cannot easily be
explained.** Regarding the androgens, the tissue/plasma gradient was higher
for DHEA than for 5-Adiol, and for DHEAS there was very probably a much lower
tissue gradient. The highly significant correlation between the androgens
suggests an intracellular metabolism of DHEAS to DHEA and 5-Adiol. **Lower
concentrations of DHEAS and DHEA were observed in the malignant tissues
compared with the normal ones and the benign lesions.** For 5-Adiol no
differences were found and therefore these data do not support our original
hypothesis on the role of this androgen in the etiology of breast
abnormalities. Hence the way in which adrenal androgens express their
influence on the breast cells remains unclear.  

Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1978 Jul;9(1):59-66. **Sex hormone concentrations in
post-menopausal women.** Vermeulen A, Verdonck L. Plasma sex hormone
concentrations (testosterone, (T), androstenedione (A), oestrone (E1) and
oestradiol (E2) were measured in forty post-menopausal women more than 4 years
post-normal menopause. **Sex hormone concentrations in this group of
postmenopausal women (greater than 4YPM) did not show any variation as a
function of age,** with the possible exception of E2 which showed a tendency
to decrease in the late post-menopause. E1 and to a lesser extent E2 as well
as the E1/A ratio were significantly corelated with degree of obesity or fat
mass, suggesting a possible role of fat tissue in the aromatization of
androgens. Neither the T/A nor the E2/E1 ratios were correlated with fat mass,
suggesting that the reduction of 17 oxo-group does not occur in fat tissue.
The E1/A ratio was significantly higher than the reported conversion rate of A
in E1.  

J Steroid Biochem 1984 Nov;21(5):607-12. **The endogenous concentration of
estradiol and estrone in normal human postmenopausal endometrium.** Vermeulen-
Meiners C, Jaszmann LJ, Haspels AA, Poortman J, Thijssen JH The endogenous
estrone (E1) and estradiol (E2) levels (pg/g tissue) were measured in 54
postmenopausal, atrophic endometria and compared with the E1 and E2 levels in
plasma (pg/ml). The results from the tissue levels of both steroids **showed
large variations and there was no significant correlation with their plasma
levels. The mean E2 concentration in tissue was 420 pg/g, 50 times higher than
in plasma and the E1 concentration of 270 pg/g was 9 times higher.** The E2/E1
ratio in tissue of 1.6, was higher than the corresponding E2/E1 ratio in
plasma, being 0.3. **We conclude that normal postmenopausal atrophic
endometria contain relatively high concentrations of estradiol and somewhat
lower estrone levels.** These tissue levels do not lead to histological
effects.  

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998 Dec; 83(12):4474-80. **Deficient 17beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 expression in endometriosis: failure to
metabolize 17beta-estradiol.** Zeitoun K, Takayama K, Sasano H, Suzuki T,
Moghrabi N, Andersson S, Johns A, Meng L, Putman M, Carr B, Bulun SE. ****
Aberrant aromatase expression in stromal cells of endometriosis gives rise to
conversion of circulating androstenedione to estrone in this tissue, whereas
aromatase expression is absent in the eutopic endometrium. In this study, we
initially demonstrated by Northern blotting transcripts of the reductive
17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17betaHSD) type 1, which catalyzes the
conversion of estrone to 17beta-estradiol, in both eutopic endometrium and
endometriosis. **Thus, it follows that the product of the aromatase reaction,
namely estrone, that is weakly estrogenic can be converted to the potent
estrogen, 17beta-estradiol, in endometriotic tissues. It was previously**
**demonstrated that progesterone stimulates the inactivation of 17beta-
estradiol** through conversion to estrone in eutopic endometrial epithelial
cells. **In conclusion, inactivation of 17beta-estradiol is impaired in
endometriotic tissues due to deficient expression of 17betaHSD-2, which is
normally expressed in eutopic endometrium in response to progesterone.**  

Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999 Aug 2;261(2):499-503. **Piceatannol, a
stilbene phytochemical, inhibits mitochondrial F0F1-ATPase activity by
targeting the F1 complex.** Zheng J, Ramirez VD.  

Eur J Pharmacol 1999 Feb 26;368(1):95-102. **Rapid inhibition of rat brain
mitochondrial proton F0F1-ATPase activity by estrogens: comparison with Na+,
K+ -ATPase of porcine cortex. Zheng J, Ramirez VD**. The data indicate that
the ubiquitous mitochondrial F0F1-ATPase is a specific target site for
estradiol and related estrogenic compounds; however, under this in vitro
condition, the effect seems to require pharmacological concentrations.  

J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1999 Jan;68(1-2):65-75. **Purification and
identification of an estrogen binding protein from rat brain: oligomycin
sensitivity-conferring protein (OSCP), a subunit of mitochondrial F0F1-ATP
synthase/ATPase.** Zheng J, Ramirez VD. This finding opens up the possibility
that estradiol, and probably other compounds with **similar structures, in
addition to their classical genomic mechanism, may interact with ATP
synthase/ATPase by binding to OSCP, and thereby modulating cellular energy
metabolism.**

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

