![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Blocking Tissue Destruction**  

There always seems to be a rough balance between tissue regeneration and
tissue degeneration, with growth and repair occurring when the equilibrium
shifts in one direction,and with atrophy or degeneration occurring when the
balance shifts in the other direction. If we can understand the mechanisms of
atrophy, and how to retard or to block tissue destruction, then we can restore
the balance to a degree which might allow regeneration to occur, even if we
don't clearly understand the mechanisms of growth.  

Skin and bones are such different types of tissue that it will be useful to
start with them, because if we can see similar processes of degeneration or
regeneration in them, then the chances are good that the same processes will
occur in other tissues too. Bone is a relatively stable tissue, while skin is
a tissue whose cells divide rapidly.  

It is common medical knowledge that cortisone and realted glucocorticioid-type
hormones cause skin to atrophy, becoming thinner. Using topical applications
of a synthetic derivative of cortisione,CM Papa and A M. Kligman showed that
the atrophy extended to the pigment cells,reducing theirr size and eliminating
most of their dendritic branches. Some animal studies have found that estrogen
caused the skin to become thinner. The other steroids they
tested,progesterone, testosterone,and pregnenolone, acted in the opposite
direction, making aged and atrophied skin thicker and more regular. They also
made the pigment cells larger, and increased their branchinhg.l Since these
hormones were already known to have protective actions against cortisone and
estrogen, these results were not too surprising, though they did directly
contradict the claims of people who made estrogen-containing cosmetics.  

Since progesterone and pregnenolone do not cause healthy, young skin to
thicken, their effect in damaged skin is probably partly to replace the
deficiency of that type of steroid which occurs with aging, and to offset the
damaging effects of the catabolic hormones, whose influence does not decrease
with age.

Many years ago it was found that in old age a woman's estrogens were
increasedd relative to the 17-keto steroids adrenal androgens. Later, it was
found that the conversion of androgen to estrogen increases with age in both
men and women, and that this occurs largely in fat cells. Several years ago,
P. K. Siiteri found that low thyroid modified the enzymes of fat cells in a
way that would tend to increase the conversion of androgen to estrogen. More
recently, it was found that adding progesterone to the enzymes had the
opposite effect of aging and hypothyroidism, protecting the androgen from
conversion to estrogen. These researchers (C. J. Newton and colleagues, of
London) concluded that the decreased output of progesterone after the
menopause might account for the increased production of estrogen.3 Since
progesterone declines in aging men, too, this could account for the same
process in men.  

Vitamin A's effect on the skin opposes that of estrogen.4 There are several
mechanisms that could account for this. Vitamin A is used in the formation of
steroids, and since the skin is a major site of steroid metabolism, vitamin A
might help to maintain the level of the anti-catabolic steroids. A deficiency
of vitamin A causes excessive release of the lysosomal enzymes, acid
hydrolases, resulting in tissue catabolism.5 Also, vitamin A is necessary for
the proper differentiation of cells in skin and other membranes. A deficiency
tends to cause an increased rate of cell division, with the production of
abnormal cells, and a substitution of keratinized cells for other types.
Estrogen also promotes keratinization and speeds cell division. A deficiency
of vitamin A can cause leukoplakia in the mouth and on the cervix of the
uterus; although this is considered "pre-cancerous," I have found it to be
very easily reversible, as I have discussed elsewhere.6 I suspect that the
intracellular fiber, keratin, is produced when a cell can't afford to do
anything more complex. Adequate vitamin A speeds protein synthesis,7 and
allows it to be used more efficiently.  

Prolactin (which is promoted by estrogen, and inhibited by progesterone)
increases with stress and with age. It probably affects every tissue, but it
seems to have its greatest efects on the secretory membranes. It is known to
have strong effects on the kidney, gut and skin (sweat and oil glands, hair
follicles, and feathers inbirds), and on the gills of fish. Its involvement
with milk production suggests that it might mobilize calcium from bones, and
inf fact it does contribute to osteoporosis. This was foreseen by G. Bourne,
in his book on the metabolism of hard tissues, when he suggested that
estrogen, acting through the pituitary, might be expected to promote
osteoporosis.  

Since reading Bourne's book, I have doubted that it was rational to use
estrogen to prevent osteoporosis, especially when it is known to be
carcinogenic and when the ratio of estrogen to and

androgens and progesterone increases after menopause. Now that several
publications have appeared clearly showing that estrogen increases prolactin,
that prolactin increases with

cancellous bone; adrenal androgens. Thyroid. Rate of formation, overall
metabolic rate.

**ARTHRITIS AND NATURAL HORMONES**

A very healthy 71 year-old man was under his house repairing the foundation,
when a support slipped and let the house fall far enough to break some facial
bones. During his recovery, he developed arthritis in his hands. It is fairly
common for arthritis to appear shortly after an accident, a shock, or surgery,
and Han Selye's famous work with rats shows that when stress exhausts the
adrenal glands (so they are unable to produce normal amounts of cortisone and
related steroid hormones), arthritis and other "degenerative" diseases are
likely to develop.  

But when this man went to his doctor to "get something for his arthritis," he
was annoyed that the doctor insisted on giving him a complete physical exam,
and wouldn't give him a shot of cortisone. The examination showed low thyroid
function, and the doctor prescribed a supplement of thyroid extract,
explaining that arthritis is one of the many symptoms of hypothyroidism. The
patient agreed to take the thyroid, but for several days he grumbled about the
doctor 'fixing something that wasn't wrong' with him, and ignoring his
arthritis. But in less than two weeks, the arthritis had entirely disappeared.
He lived to be 89, without a recurrence of arthritis. (He died iatrogenically,
while in good health.)  

Selye's work with the diseases of stress, and the anti-stress hormones of the
adrenal cortex, helped many scientists to think more clearly about the
interaction of the organism with its environment, but it has led others to
focus too narrowly on hormones of the adrenal cortex (such as cortisol and
cortisone), and to forget the older knowledge about natural resistance. There
are probably only a few physicians now practicing who would remember to check
for hypothyroidism in an arthritis patient, or in other stress-related
conditions. Hypothyroidism is a common cause of adrenal insufficiency, but it
also has some direct effects on joint tissues. In chronic hypothyroidism
(myxedema and cretinism), knees and elbows are often bent abnormally.  

By the 1930's, it was well established that the resistance of the organism
depended on the energy produced by respiration under the influence of the
thyroid gland, as well as on the adrenal hormones, and that the hormones of
pregnancy (especially progesterone) could substitute for the adrenal hormones.
In a sense, the thyroid hormone is the basic anti-stress hormone, since it is
required for the production of the adrenal and pregnancy hormones.  

A contemporary researcher, F. Z. Meerson, is putting together a picture of the
biological processes involved in adapting to stress, including energy
production, nutrition, hormones, and changes in cell structure.  

While one of Selye's earliest observations related gastrointestinal bleeding
to stress, Meerson's work has revealed in a detailed way how the usually
beneficial hormone of adaptation, cortisone, can cause so many other harmful
effects when its action is too prolonged or too intense.  

Some of the harmful effects of the cortisone class of drugs (other than
gastro-intestinal bleeding) are: Hypertension, osteoporosis, delayed healing,
atrophy of the skin, convulsions, cataracts, glaucoma, protruding eyes,
psychic derangements, menstrual irregularities, and loss of immunity allowing
infections (or cancer) to spread.  

While normal thyroid function is required for the secretion of the adrenal
hormones, the basic signal which causes cortisone to be formed is a drop in
the blood glucose level. The increased energy requirement of any stress tends
to cause the blood sugar to fall slightly, but hypothyroidism itself tends to
depress blood sugar.  

The person with low thyroid function is more likely than a normal person to
require cortisone to cope with a certain amount of stress. However, if large
amounts of cortisone are produced for a long time, the toxic effects of the
hormone begin to appear. According to Meerson, heart attacks are provoked and
aggravated by the cortisone produced during stress. (Meerson and his
colleagues have demonstrated that the progress of a heart attack can be halted
by a treatment including natural substances such as vitamin E and magnesium.)  

While hypothyroidism makes the body require more cortisone to sustain blood
sugar and energy production, it also limits the ability to produce cortisone,
so in some cases stress produces symptoms resulting from a deficiency of
cortisone, including various forms of arthritis and more generalized types of
chronic inflammation.  

Often, a small physiological dose of natural hydrocortisone can help the
patient meet the stress, without causing harmful side-effects. While treating
the symptoms with cortisone for a short time, it is important to try to learn
the basic cause of the problem, by checking for hypothyroidism, vitamin A
deficiency, protein deficiency, a lack of sunlight, etc. (I suspect that light
on the skin directly increases the skin's production of steroids, without
depending on other organs. Different steroids probably involve different
frequencies of light, but orange and red light seem to be important
frequencies.) Using cortisone in this way, physiologically rather than
pharmacologically, it is not likely to cause the serious problems mentioned
above.  

Stress-induced cortisone deficiency is thought to be a factor in a great
variety of unpleasant conditions, from allergies to ulcerative colitis, and in
many forms of arthritis. The stress which can cause a cortisone deficiency is
even more likely to disturb formation of progesterone and thyroid hormone, so
the fact that cortisone can relieve symptoms does not mean that it has
corrected the problem.  

According to the Physicians' Desk Referenc, hormones similar to cortisone are
useful for treating rheumatoid arthritis, post-traumatic osteoarthritis,
synovitis of osteoarthritis, acute gouty arthritis, acute nonspecific
tenosynovitis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, acute and subacute
bursitis, and epicondylitis.  

Although cortisone supplementation can help in a great variety of stress-
related diseases, no curewill take place unless the basic cause is discovered.
Besides the thyroid, the other class of adaptive hormones which are often out
of balance in the diseases of stress, is the group of hormones produced mainly
by the gonads: the "reproductive hormones." During pregnancy these hormones
serve to protect the developing baby from the stresses suffered by the mother,
but the same hormones function as part to the protective anti-stress system in
the non-pregnant individual, though at a lower level.  

Some forms of arthritis are known to improve or even to disappear during
pregnancy. As mentioned above, the hormones of pregnancy can make up for a
lack of adrenal cortex hormones. During a healthy pregnancy, many hormones are
present in increased amounts, including the thyroid hormones. Progesterone,
which is the most abundant hormone of pregnancy, has both anti-inflammatory
and anesthetic actions, which would be of obvious benefit in arthritis.  
  

There are other naturally anesthetic hormones which are increased during
pregnancy, including DHEA, which is being studied for its anti-aging, anti-
cancer, and anti-obesity effects. (One of the reasons that is frequently given
for the fact that this hormone hasn't been studied more widely is that, as a
natural substance, it has not been monopolized by a drug patent, and so no
drug company has been willing to invest money in studying its medical uses.)
These hormones also have the ability to control cell division, which would be
important in forms of arthritis that involve invasive tissue growth.  

While these substances, so abundant in pregnancy, have the ability to
substitute for cortisone, they can also be used by the adrenal glands to
produce cortisol and related hormones. But probably the most surprising
property of these natural steroids is that they protect against the toxic
side-effects of excessive adrenal hormones. And they seem to have no side-
effects of their own; after about fifty years of medical use, no toxic side
effects have been found for progesterone or pregnenolone.  

Pregnenolone is the material the body uses to form either progesterone or
DHEA. Others, including DHEA, haven't been studied for so long, but the high
levels which are normally present in healthy people would suggest that
replacement doses, to restore those normal levels, would not be likely to
produce toxic side effects. And, considering the terrible side effects of the
drugs that are now widely used, these drugs would be justifiable simply to
prevent some of the toxic effects of conventional treatment.  

It takes a new way of thinking to understand that these protective substances
protect against an excess of the adrenal steroids, as well as making up for a
deficiency. Several of these natural hormones also have a protective action
against various poisons; Selye called this their "catatoxic" effect.  

Besides many people whose arthritis improved with only thyroid
supplementation, I have seen 30 people use one or more of these other natural
hormones for various types of arthritis, usually with a topical application.
Often the pain is relieved within a few minutes. I know of several other
people who used progesterone topically for inflamed tendons, damaged
cartilage, or other inflammations. Only one of these, a woman with rheumatoid
arthritis in many joints, had no significant improvement. An hour after she
had applied it to her hands and feet, she enthusiastically reported that her
ankle had stopped hurting, but after this she said she had no noticeable
improvement.  

We often hear that "there is no cure for arthritis, because the causes are not
known." If the cause is an imbalance in the normal hormones of adaptation and
resistance, then eliminating the cause by restoring balance will produce a
true cure. But if it is more profitable to sell powerful drugs than to sell
the nutrients needed to form natural hormones (or to supplement those natural
hormones) we can't expect the drug companies to spend any money investigating
that sort of cure. And at present the arthritis market amounts to billions of
dollars in drug sales each year.  

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

