![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
The transparency of life: Cataracts as a model of age-related disease**  
_

Cataracts can disappear when the eye's metabolic condition is corrected. A
supply of energy is essential to maintain the transparent structure.

Lactic acid increases as carbon dioxide decreases, during a typical energy
deficiency. Deficient thyroid, and the resulting excess of cortisol relative
to pregnenolone and progesterone, define the energy deficiency.

Increased lactate relative to CO2 in the cell alters cell pH and electrical
charge, causing swelling. Swelling and increased water content characterize
the cataract.

High altitude is inversely related to cataracts, despite the known role of
sunlight in causing cataracts; this is a strong confirmation of the protective
role of carbon dioxide.

_

* * *

In the markets around Lake Patzcuaro, they sell green transparent fish, about
6 inches long. When cooked, the meat is white, like ordinary fish. Most fish
filets are a little translucent, but are at least cloudy, and usually pink by
transmitted light. I dont know how the transparent fish work, because it
seems that the blood and the network of blood vessels needed to sustain muscle
activity would diffuse the light. Anyway, cooking disrupts the mysteriously
ordered state of water and proteins that makes them transparent, roughly the
way egg-white loses its transparency when it is cooked. I have never heard a
convincing explanation for the opacity of cooked egg-white, either, but
anything that disrupts the original structuring of the protein-water
interaction will destroy the transparency.

Around 1970, I used a technique called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), which
is the basis for the procedure known as MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), to
compare the state of water in old (uterine) tissue and young tissue. Old
tissue predictably contains less water than young tissue, but I found that the
water in the old tissue was in a relatively free and uncontrolled state. When
tissue swells and takes up water, more of the water is likely to be in this
uncontrolled state, and this is one of the things that makes MRI so useful,
because tumors, for example, show up vividly because of their large amount of
uncontrolled (unbound) water. I suspect that the measurements I made on
uterine tissue showed a localized effect, that opposed the general trend
toward increased dryness with aging. In the case of cataracts, this is clearly
the case **:** Most of the lens becomes drier with age, but at a certain point
there is a reversal, and some of the tissue takes up too much water. Thats
why I refer to cataracts as a model of age-related disease, rather than as a
model of aging. In this sense, I am including them among the inflammatory
diseases of aging--colitis, arthritis, and cancer, for example. MRI now can
show developing cataracts before they are visible, because of increased water
content in the area.

The lens of the eye is a fairly dense, tough, transparent living structure,
which can develop opaque areas, cataracts, as a result of old age, poisoning,
radiation, disease, or trauma. The varieties of cataract relate to the causes.
Most of the oxidative metabolism of the lens is in or near the epithelial
layer that surrounds it. Old-age cataracts most often begin in this region.

Although the efficient oxidative energy metabolism occurs near the surface of
the lens, **there is a constant flow of fluid through the lens,** entering it
mainly in the front and back, and leaving on its sides or equator
(considering the front and back as the poles, the direction light passes
through). Oxygen and nutrients are supplied to the lens by way of this
circulation of fluid, entering mostly from the aqueous humor in front (which
also supplies the cornea), but also from the vitreous humor behind the lens.

When the flow of nutrients and energy is impaired, the organized state of the
protein and water system in the cell is damaged, and an excess of water is
taken up by the cells, as the protein content decreases. The loss of
organization causes light to be dispersed, with a loss of transparency.

The lens of the eye is usually treated as something so specialized that it is
hardly considered to be part of our living substance, just as dentistry has
tended to treat teeth as inert things to be approached mechanically, rather
than physiologically. **The lenss circulatory system is very interesting,
because of what it says about the nature of living substance. In the absence
of blood vessels, it provides its own flow of nutrients.** This flow is
reminiscent of the flow of substances through the dentine channels of the
teeth, through the axons of nerves (two-way transport in a very narrow
channel), and, in some ways recalls the flow of fluids in plants, called
guttation (drop formation), which is disturbing to botanists, because it is
contrary to the textbook descriptions of proper physiology.

**The flow of material through lens cells, dentine canals, and nerve axons
should allow us to gain a perspective in which these observable processes
become a model for other biological situations** in which transport occurs
**:** Kidney, intestine, or the skin of frogs, for example, in which water,
ions, and other solutes are moved in considerable quantities.

When cells metabolize, they create gradients. In the cell, electrical,
chemical, osmotic, and thermal gradients, for example, are constantly being
produced or maintained. The whole substance of the cell is involved in its
life processes. Because of prejudices introduced 200 years ago, the life of
the cell has been relegated to its membrane (where hypothetical membrane
pumps reside) and its nucleus. **When the term cell (hollow space) came
into use instead of corpuscle (little body), a mind-set came into existence
that discounted the importance of most of the living material,** and claimed
that it was a mere random solution. Random solutions dont do much. The
wonderful membrane, under the direction of the nucleus (and its set of
instructions), took care of everything.

Whenever assimilation or excretion took place, it was explained by inventing a
property possessed by the cell membranes. Therefore, we have physiology
textbooks that have an unfounded explanation for everything. Before
Copernicus, planetary movements were described as arbitrary "epicycles." They
didn't make sense, but people studied them and felt that they were important.
"Membrane physiology" is the modern equivalent of the Ptolemaic epicycles.  

We know that glucose can be metabolized into pyruvic acid, which, in the
presence of oxygen, can be metabolized into carbon dioxide. Without oxygen,
pyruvic acid can be converted into lactic acid. The production of lactic acid
tends to increase the pH inside the cell, and its excretion can lower the pH
outside the cell.

The decrease of carbon dioxide that generally accompanies increased lactic
acid, corresponds to increased intracellular pH. Carbon dioxide binds to many
types of protein, for example by forming carbamino groups, changing the
protein conformation, as well as its electrical properties, such as its
isoelectric point. With increased pH, cell proteins become more strongly
ionized, tending to separate, allowing water to enter the spaces, in the same
way a gel swells in an alkaline solution.

The Bohr-Haldane effect describes the fact that hemoglobin releases oxygen in
the presence of carbon dioxide, and releases carbon dioxide in the presence of
oxygen. When oxygen is too abundant, it makes breathing more difficult, and
one of its effects is to cause carbon dioxide to be lost rapidly. At high
altitude, more carbon dioxide is retained, and this makes cellular respiration
more efficient.

The importance of carbon dioxide to cell control process, and to the structure
of the cell and the structure of proteins in general suggested that
degenerative diseases would be less common at high altitude. Wounds and broken
bones heal faster at high altitude, but the available statistics are
especially impressive in two of the major degenerative conditions, cancer and
cataracts.

The two biggest studies of altitude and cataracts (involving 12,217 patients
in one study, and 30,565 lifelong residents in a national survey in Nepal)
showed a negative correlation between altitude and the incidence of cataract.
At high altitude, cataracts appeared at a later age. **In Nepal, an increase
of a few thousand feet in elevation decreased the incidence of cataracts by
2.7 times. At the same time, it was found that exposure to sunlight increased
the incidence of cataracts, and since the intensity of ultraviolet radiation
is increased with altitude, this makes the decreased incidence of cataracts
even more important.**

All of the typical causes of cataracts, aging, poisons, and radiation,
decrease the formation of carbon dioxide, and tend to increase the formation
of lactic acid. **Lactic acid excess is typically found in eyes with
cataracts.**

The electrical charge on the structural proteins will tend to increase in the
presence of lactic acid or the deficiency of carbon dioxide, and the increase
of charge will tend to increase the absorption of water.  

The lens can survive for a considerable length of time _in vitro_ (since it
has its own circulatory system), __ so it has been possible to demonstrate
that changes in the composition of the fluid can cause opacities to form, or
to disappear.

Oxidants, including hydrogen peroxide which occurs naturally in the aqueous
humor, can cause opacities to form quickly, but they will also disappear
quickly in a solution that restores metabolic energy. The lens regulates
itself powerfully **;** for example, it will swell when put into a hypotonic
solution, but will quickly adapt, returning to approximately its normal size.

Several years ago, I saw what appeared to be oxidant-induced cataracts. Two
women had a very sudden onset of cataracts, and I asked about their diet and
supplements **;** it turned out that one of them had begun taking 500 mg of
zinc daily a few months earlier, and the other had begun taking 600 mg of zinc
and 250 mg of iron, on her doctors recommendation, just a couple of months
before the cataracts appeared.

For some reason, there have been many nutritional supplements sold as cataract
remedies in the form of eye drops. I suppose a trace of the material could
diffuse through the cornea into the aqueous humor, where it might make a
difference in the lenss nutrient supply, but it seems more reasonable to
treat the body as a whole, nourishing every part in a balanced way.

Besides living at a high elevation or breathing extra carbon dioxide, the most
certain way to increase the amount of carbon dioxide in the eye, and to
prevent an excess of lactic acid, is to make sure that your thyroid function
is adequate.

One man who took thyroid, USP, and vitamin E told me that his cataracts had
regressed, but I havent known other people who tried this.

If a person already has distinct cataracts, it might be worthwhile to
experiment with a relatively high degree of hypercapnia, for example,
breathing a 5% mixture of CO2 in air.

Carbon dioxide, at higher levels than are normal at sea level, has a profound
effect on free radicals, reducing the free radical activity in the blood to
approximately zero, before reaching the level that produces acidosis.

There are several situations in which carbon dioxide affects the hydration,
water content, of biological materials, that I think give an insight into its
effects on the lens. Hydrophilic glycoproteins are involved in each case.
These are proteins with attached chains of sugar molecules that make them
associate with a large amount of water. In the cornea, increased carbon
dioxide strongly protects against swelling. The bulk of the cornea is a
connective tissue that is relatively simple and passive compared to the
compact cellular structure of the lens, and it is conventional to describe the
thin layers of cells on the inside and outside of the cornea as being
responsible for the water content of the underlying substance. However, even
when the epithelial cells are removed, it has been demonstrated that carbon
dioxide is able to prevent corneal swelling. (M.V. Riley, et al., The roles
of bicarbonate and CO2 in transendothelial fluid movement and control of
corneal thickness," _Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 36(1),_ 103-112, 1995.)

Bronchial mucous secretions are an even simpler system, so it is very
interesting that carbon dioxide is recognized as the most powerful regulator
of their behavior. (This has important implications for cystic fibrosis, or
mucoviscidosis.) Goodman and Gilman (page 1068, _Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics,_ 2nd Edition, Macmillan Co., 1956), say  

"Among inhalants, steam and carbon dioxide have been found to be excellent
expectorants. Relative humidity above 85 per cent liquefies sputum, decreases
its viscosity...." "Carbon dioxide is the most effective agent of all. It not
only lowers the viscosity of tenacious sputum, thereby facilitating
expectoration, but it decreases the volume of sputum by promoting its active
resorption by bronchial mucosa." "A five to ten per cent concentration of
carbon dioxide is adequate and well tolerated if administered at intervals."
"Oxygen has been shown to be an antiexpectorant and has effects opposite to
those of carbon"  

Oxygen tends to displace carbon dioxide from tissue, and is a source of free
radicals.

One of the best-known free radical scavenging substances that has been widely
used as a drug is iodide. It has been used to treat asthma, parasites,
syphilis, cancer, Graves disease, periodontal disease, and arteriosclerosis.
Diseases that produce tissue overgrowth associated with inflammation--
granulomas--have been treated with iodides, and although the iodide doesnt
necessarily kill the germ, it does help to break down and remove the
granuloma. Leprosy and syphilis were among the diseases involving granulomas*
that were treated in this way. In the case of tuberculosis, it has been
suggested that iodides combine with unsaturated fatty acids which inhibit
proteolytic enzymes, and thus allow for the removal of the abnormal tissue.

In experimental animals, iodide clearly delays the appearance of cataracts.
(Buchberger, et al., 199l.)

Inflammation, edema, and free radical production are closely linked, and are
produced by most things that interfere with energy production.

Endotoxin, produced by bacteria, mainly in the intestine, disrupts energy
production, and promotes maladaptive inflammation. The wide spectrum of
benefit that iodide has, especially in diseases with an inflammatory
component, suggests first that it protects tissue by blocking free radical
damage, but it also suggests the possibility that it might specifically
protect against endotoxin.  

There are subtler differences in transparence that probably have a variety of
causes, but differences in water content or hydration might be involved in the
lower transparency that has been seen in women's lenses. Estrogen, which tends
to produce edema and hypotonic body fluids, also increases prolactin
production. Prolactin is involved in water and electrolyte regulation, and it
has been found to **accelerate the development of experimental cataracts.**
(M. C. Ng, et al, 1987.) These hormones are associated with the calcification
of soft tissues, and cataracts contain very high levels of calcium. (Avarachan
and Rawal, 1987; Hightower and Reddy, 1982.)

Estrogen is strongly associated with free radical processes, calcium
mobilization, and acetylcholine release, all of which are involved in the
process of excitoxicity. Alvarez, et al., (1996) have shown a possible
involvement of acetylcholine in calcium mobilization in the lens.

Serotonin is another regulatory substance strongly associated with prolactin
and estrogen, and it also can be involved in disrupting the metabolism of the
lens. This is one of the potential dangers in using supplemental tryptophan.
(Candia, et al., 1980.)  

Old age commonly involves some changes in the color of tissues--loss of
pigment from hair and skin, with appearance of new pigment (age pigment,
lipofuscin), which may appear as liver spots. But there is also a tendency
of the toenails, fingernails, teeth, and lenses to turn yellow or brown. Some
of this dark material seems to be age pigment, derived from unsaturated fatty
acids, but other components have been identified, for example, tryptophan from
damaged proteins. The Maillard reaction (similar to the browning that occurs
in bread crust) has often been mentioned in relation to aging, and involves
the combination of protein amino groups with sugars. But the browning of the
lens tends to be associated with the general age related drying of the lens,
it isnt irregularly distributed, and it doesnt significantly harm vision.

When I first heard about the age-related browning of the lens, I thought that
the experience of colors would be affected, so I devised a test in which the
relative darkness of blue and yellow could be judged in comparison with a
graded strip of shades of grey.

After people of ages ranging from 10 to 80 had given exactly the same matches,
I realized that the nervous system probably corrects for the yellow filter
effect of the brown lens.

The browning of tissues will be the subject of another newsletter.  

Among the interesting causes of cataracts **:** Tamoxifen and hypotonic
fluids, sodium deficiency **;** toxicity of tryptophan **;** oxidants (metals,
hydrogen peroxide, PUFA); diabetes, photosensitizers and sunlight **;** excess
calcium, deficient magnesium. Excess cortisol. Radiation. Arachidonic and
linoleic acids in other situations have been found to block cells' regulation
of their water content. Hypothyroidism tends to increase the activity of
serotonin, estrogen, prolactin, calcium, and the tendency of tissues to retain
water, and to decrease the level of ATP.

Among the factors that probably have a role in preventing cataracts **:**
Thyroid, progesterone, pregnenolone, vitamin E, iodide, pyruvate. Increasing
the carbon dioxide lowers the cells pH, and tends to resist swelling.
Palmitic acid (a saturated fat that can be synthesized by our tissues) is
normally oxidized by the lens. Calcium blockers experimentally prevent
cataracts, suggesting that magnesium and thyroid (which also act to exclude
calcium from cells) would have the same effect.

Thyroid hormone is essential for maintaining adequate carbon dioxide
production, for minimizing lactic acid, cortisol and prolactin, for regulating
calcium and magnesium, for avoiding hypotonicity of the body fluids, and for
improving the ratio of palmitic acid to linoleic acid.

.

****

******REFERENCES**  

Inhibition of ionic transport and ATPase activities by serotonin analogues in
the isolated toad lens, Candia OA; Lanzetta PA; Alvarez LJ; Gaines W, Biochim
Biophys Acta (602)2, 389-400, 1980. Tryptamine, 5-methyltryptamine and
5-methoxytryptamine had dual effects: 1 mM in the posterior bathing solution
depressed the potential difference of the posterior face of the lens, which
resulted in an increase in the translenticular potential difference and short-
circuit current; 1 mM in the anterior solution (in contact with the lens
epithelium) produced a quick and pronounced reduction of the potential
difference of the anterior face. This resulted in a 90-100% decline of the
translenticular short-circuit current. Serotonin and tryptamine were then
tested for their effect on the ATPases of lens epithelium. Both amines
inhibited the enzymes with tryptamine at 5 mM completely inhibiting all ATPase
activity. **Since tryptophan is transported from the aqueous humor into the
lens and may be converted by lens enzymes to serotonin and tryptamine, these
findings may have physiological implications in cataractogenesis.**  

Effects of Ca2+ on rabbit translens short-circuit current: evidence for a
Ca2+ inhibitable K+ conductance," Alvarez LJ; Candia OA; Zamudio AC, Curr Eye
Res, 1996 Dec, 15:12, 1198-207. PURPOSE: To characterize the effects of medium
Ca2+ levels on rabbit lens electrical properties. Overall, these results
suggest that **lens Ca2(+)-mobilizing agents (e.g. acetylcholine)** could
trigger the inhibition of epithelial K+ conductance(s) by the direct action of
Ca2+ on K+ channels."  

Effects of Ca2+ on rabbit translens short-circuit current: evidence for a
Ca2+ inhibitable K+ conductance, Alvarez LJ; Candia OA; Zamudio AC, Curr Eye
Res, 1996 Dec, 15:12, 1198-207. PURPOSE: To characterize the effects of
medium Ca2+ levels on rabbit lens electrical properties. Overall, these
results suggest that lens Ca2(+)-mobilizing agents (e.g. acetylcholine) could
trigger the inhibition of epithelial K+ conductance(s) by the direct action of
Ca2+ on K+ channels.  

D600 increases the resistance associated with the equatorial potassium
current of the lens, Walsh SP; Patterson JW, Exp Eye Res, 1992 Jul, 55:1,
81-5 This effect is similar to that produced by quinine and by a calcium-free
medium, and is attributed to the prevention of an increase in the calcium-
dependent conductance produced by pCMPS.  

Effects of hydrogen peroxide oxidation and calcium channel blockers on the
equatorial potassium current of the frog lens, Walsh SP; Patterson JW, Exp
Eye Res, 1994 Mar, 58:3, 257-65. Hydrogen peroxide, in concentrations of
10-1000 microM, produces two major changes in the current-voltage
relationships associated with the equatorial potassium current of the lens.
First, the resting and reversal potentials become more negative than they were
prior to treatment with hydrogen peroxide and second, the membrane resistance
related to the equatorial current is decreased. The shift in the resting and
reversal potentials is in the opposite direction from that produced by
ouabain. Based on the Nernst equation, the shift in the reversal potential
suggests that there is an **increase in the concentration of potassium in the
lens. The 86Rb uptake and efflux are increased. These observations suggest
that hydrogen peroxide stimulates the Na,K-pump. The decrease in membrane
resistance is inhibited by 100 microM of quinine, a calcium-dependent
potassium channel blocker, and does not decrease in a calcium-free medium.
This suggests that the decrease in resistance may be secondary to an increase
in lenticular calcium.** These effects of hydrogen peroxide are similar to
those of p-chloromercuriphenylsulfonate (pCMPS), a nearly impermeant
sulfhydryl binding agent, **and suggest that permeant hydrogen peroxide may
increase calcium influx by acting on sulfhydryl groups on the outer surface of
lens membranes. Verapamil, a calcium channel blocker, is reported to prevent
cataract formation.**   

Effect of prolactin on galactose cataractogenesis, Ng MC; Tsui JY; Merola
LO; Unakar NJ phthalmic Res 19:2, 82-94, 1987. Prolactin has been known to
affect the water and electrolyte balance. Because increased lens hydration has
been shown to be a common phenomenon in most, if not all types of cataracts,
we have been interested in investigating a possible role of prolactin in sugar
cataract induction and progression. For this study, we have used morphological
and biochemical approaches. The prolactin delivery method involved
intraperitoneal implantation of one or more pellets in Sprague-Dawley female
rats. Following implantation of the desired number of prolactin or control
(nonprolactin) pellets, animals were either fed galactose and lab chow, or lab
chow diet. Gross morphological observations of whole lenses, slit-lamp
examination of lenses and light microscopic analysis of lens sections showed
that in the galactose-fed prolactin group, galactose associated alteration
progressed faster and total opacification (mature cataract development) was
achieved earlier than in the nonprolactin group. The levels of galactose and
dulcitol were higher in the lenses of galactose-fed prolactin treated rats as
compared to lenses from nonprolactin (control) rats. No significant difference
in lens Na+-K+ ATPase activity between the prolactin and nonprolactin group
was observed. Our results indicate that prolactin accelerates galactose-
induced cataractogenesis in rats."  

"A hypothetical mechanism for toxic cataract due to oxidative damage to the
lens epithelial membrane," Bender CJ Med Hypotheses, 1994 Nov, 43:5, 307-11
Lenticular opacities can be induced by numerous external agents that
**coincide with those that catalyze oxidative damage to lipids.** One of the
consequences of lipid peroxidation is that the affected membrane is rendered
more permeable to protons. A proton leak in the tight epithelium of lens
**would uncouple the Na+/K(+)-ATPases that regulate the water** and ionic
content of the bounded tissue. Once regulatory control of the osmotic pressure
is lost, **the phase state of the** cell's soluble proteins would change,
**leading to refractive changes or, in extreme cases, precipitation**. The
same does not occur in cornea because the stroma is an extracellular polymer
blend rather than solution of soluble polymers. Polymeric phase transitions in
the cornea require that divalent cations pass the epithelial membrane, which
can occur only through the action of ionophores.  

Tsubota K; Laing RA; Kenyon KR Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 1987 May, 28:5,
785-9, **Abnormalities in glucose metabolism are thought to be among the main
causes of cataract formation.** The authors have made noninvasive biochemical
measurements of the lens that provide information concerning glucose
metabolism in the lens epithelium. The autofluorescence of reduced pyridine
nucleotides (PN) and oxidized flavoproteins (Fp) within the rabbit lens were
noninvasively measured as a function of depth using redox fluorometry. The
peak of the autofluorescence at 440 nm (excited at 360 nm) and 540 nm
**(excited at 460 nm) were determined at the lens epithelium. When 8 mM sodium
pentobarbital, a known inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, was applied to
the lens, the autofluorescence peak at 440 nm increased and that at 540** **nm
decreased. The 440 nm autofluorescence is thought to be from** reduced
pyridine nucleotides, whereas the 540 nm autofluorescence is from the oxidized
flavoprotein. Blocking lens respiration with pentobarbital caused an increase
in the PN/Fp ratio by a factor of 3 within 3.5 hr after pentobarbital
application.  

[Use of pyrimidine bases and ATP for conservative treatment of early
cataracts] Larionov LN Oftalmol Zh, 1977, 32:3, 221-2  

Concentrations of some ribonucleotides, L-lactate, and pyruvate in human
senile cataractous lenses with special reference to anterior
capsular/subcapsular opacity, Laursen AB Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh), 1976 Dec,
54:6, 677-92 The concentrations of some ribonucleoside tri- and diphosphates,
adenosine-5'-monophosphate, L-lactate and pyruvate were determined in human
senile cataractous lenses removed during cataract operations. Pyruvate
concentrations were found to be negligible (median = 56 mumol/kg lens wet
weight) in 15 human senile cataractous lenses. On the basis of correlations
between the biomicroscopic appearances of the senile cataractous lenses (N =
80) and the concentrations and ratios of the metabolites in question, the
following classification was found to be justified: 1. Immature cataractous
lenses without anterior capsular/subcapsular opacity: high levels of
ribonucleoside triphosphates (RTP), high sums of RTP, ribonucleoside
diphosphates (RDP), and adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP) as well as **high
levels of L-lactate and high ratios of L-lactate in the lens/L-lactate in the
aqueous**. 2. Immature cataractous lenses with anterior capsular/subcapsular
opacity; intermediate levels of RTP, intermediate values for the sums of RTP,
RDP, and AMP, **high L-lactate levels, and intermediate values of the ratios
of L-lactate in the lens/L-lactate in the aqueous.**   

Sulochana KN; Ramakrishnan S; Vasanthi SB; Madhavan HN; Arunagiri K; Punitham
R, First report of congenital or infantile cataract in deranged proteoglycan
metabolism with released xylose, Br J Ophthalmol, 1997 Apr, 81:4, 319-23."
"Of 220 children of both sexes below 12 years of age, with congenital or
infantile cataract treated in Sankara Nethralaya, Madras, India, during a
period of 2 years, 145 excreted fragments of GAG (heparan and chondroitin
sulphates) in their urine. There was no such excretion among the control group
of 50 children. **The same was found accumulated in the blood and lenses of
affected children.** In addition, xylose was present in small amounts in the
urine and blood and xylitol was present in the lens. There was a significant
elevation in the **activity of beta glucuronidase in lymphocytes and urine,**
when compared with normals. All the above findings suggest deranged
proteoglycan metabolism. As the urine contained mostly GAG fragments and very
little xylose, Benedict's reagent was not reduced. This ruled out
galactosaemia.CONCLUSION: An increase of **beta glucuronidase activity might
have caused extensive fragmentation of GAG** with resultant accumulation in
the blood and lens and excretion in urine. Small amounts of xylose may have
come from xylose links between GAG and core protein of proteoglycans. Owing to
their polyanionic nature, GAG fragments in the lens might abstract sodium, and
with it water, thereby increasing the hydration of the lens. Excessive
hydration and the osmotic effect of xylitol from xylose might cause cataract.
While corneal clouding has been reported in inborn acid mucopolysaccharidosis,
congenital or infantile cataract with deranged metabolism of proteoglycans
(acid mucopolysaccharide-xylose-protein complex) is reported in children for
the first time."  

"State of electrolytes, osmotic balance and the activity of ATPase in the
lenses of selenite--induced cataracts," Avarachan PJ; Rawal UM Indian J
Ophthalmol, 1987, 35:5-6, 210-3. "Selenite-cataracts incorporated many
morphological characteristics observed in human senile catracts. Progressive
elevation of sodium, marked loss of potassium, **several fold increment of
calcium; considerable loss of magnesium levels,** a dose-response reduction of
total-ATPase activity **and significant hydration are the important features**
observed in the lens during the progressive treatment of selenite. The sodium-
potassium imbalance is found to be a secondary effect during the development
of cataract and is suggested to bring about by **an abnormal accumulation of
calcium ions** and inactivation of transport enzyme. The calcium activated
proteases could be the promoting factor for the proteolysis and
insolubilization of lens proteins in the inducement of selenite cataract. The
impact of selenite on the SH containing ATPase anzymes could be the cause of
impairment in energy metabolism, derangement of electrolytes and osmotic
imbalance which, in turn, accelerate the cortical involvement of lens
opacities."  

"Glucose metabolism by human cataracts in culture," Wolfe JK; Chylack LT Jr
Exp Eye Res 43:2, 243-9, 1986. Metabolism in human senile cataracts has been
studied using uniformly labeled [14C]glucose. Intracapsularly extracted lenses
were cultured in TC-199 media with a glucose concentration of 5.5 mM. Results
show that lactate production accounts for 97% of the glucose metabolized.
Under these standard incubation conditions there is negligible accumulation of
alpha-glycerol phosphate, glucose-6-phosphate, and sorbitol. The rate of
lactate production was found to be relatively uniform over a range of cataract
severities which were determined from the CCRG classification. The effects of
several perturbants in the medium were measured. **An ATP concentration of 3
mM was found to inhibit lactate production."**  

M. V. Riley, et al., "The roles of bicarbonate and CO2 in transendothelial
fluid movement and control of corneal thickness," Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Sci. 36(1), 103-112, 1995. **"The equilibrium thickness of deepithelialized
corneas swollen with HCO-/CO2 on both surfaces was 35 microns less than that
of corneas swollen in HPO4-." "Normal corneal thickness can be maintained in
vitro only in media that contain HCO3- at concentrations of more than 20
mM."**  

"The effect of X-irradiation on the sodium-potassium-activated adenosine
triphosphatase (Na-K-ATPase) activity in the epithelium of the rat lens. A
histochemical and biochemical study," Palva M Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh), 1978
Jun, 56:3, 431-8. "The epithelial Na-K-ATPase activity of the rat lens was
studied after X-irradiation at intervals of three to ninety days. The enzyme
was demonstrated histochemically by light microscopy and it was measured
biochemically by a fluorometric method. Neither histochemical nor biochemical
changes of Na-K-ATPase content of the lens epithelium were observed during the
development of cataract. In whole-mount preparations the enzyme activity was
localized in the cell membranes. However, one month after radiation a few
peripheral cells had in addition a precipitated over the whole cell. **The
unaltered Na-K-ATPase** **content in the epithelium** suggests that the
hydration of the lens after X-irradiation is primarily caused by **changes in
the passive permeability properties of the cell membranes and not by a
decreased capacity of the activity cation pump."**  

McNamara NA; Polse KA; Bonanno JA **Stromal acidosis modulates corneal
swelling.** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 1994 Mar, 35:3, 846-50 "PURPOSE.
Studies have shown that stromal acidosis reduces the rate of corneal thickness
recovery after induced edema, providing the first human in vivo evidence that
corneal pH can influence corneal hydration control. This finding raises the
question of the possible effect that pH may have on induced corneal swelling.
To explore this question, the corneal swelling response to hypoxia was
measured while stromal pH was controlled. METHODS. Corneal edema and stromal
acidosis was induced in ten subjects by passing a mixture of nitrogen and
carbon dioxide gas across the eyes through tight-fitting goggles. **One eye of
each subject received 100% N2, whereas the contralateral eye received a
mixture of 95% N2 and 5% CO2. Exposures of 95% N2 + 5% CO2 lower pH on average
to 7.16 versus 7.34 for 100% N2 alone.** Before and after 2.5 hours of gas
exposure, central corneal thickness (CCT) was measured. RESULTS. **Eyes
exposed to the lower pH environment (eg, N2 + CO2) developed less change in
CCT** compared to the eyes receiving N2 alone. Overall increase in CCT was
29.9 +/- 5.3 microns for eyes exposed to the 95% N2 + 5% CO2 gas mixture,
versus 37.1 +/- 4.8 microns for 100% N2 **eyes (P < 0.0001). CONCLUSIONS. The
corneal swelling response to hypoxia can be reduced by lowering stromal pH.
Because changes in corneal pH alone have not been found to alter steady-state
CCT, it is proposed that pH ** exerts its effect only under non-steady-state
conditions (ie, corneal swelling and deswelling). This suggests that acidosis
may produce changes in the **rate of lactate metabolism** or alter endothelial
hydraulic conductivity."  

Buchberger W; Winkler R; Moser M; Rieger G, "Influence of iodide on
cataractogenesis in Emory mice," Ophthalmic Res, 1991, 23:6, 303-8. Cataract
development was studied in two groups of Emory mice by periodical
biomicroscopic examinations (beginning at 5 weeks of age) and by a final
evaluation of water-soluble SH groups in the lenses. The experimental group
was given 256 micrograms iodide/kg body weight with the drinking water
throughout the study. The untreated control group received tap water. **Iodide
treatment induced a delay of cataract formation...."** "A still significant
difference in the degree of cataract was also found between the two groups at
week 47 of age. No difference was found in the content of water-soluble SH
groups. The results are discussed in relation **to the known antioxidant and
.OH-scavenging effect of iodide and to the oxidative changes in the lens
occurring during progression of cataract development.** "  

"[The chemical nature of the fluorescing products accumulating in the lipids
of the crystalline lenses of mice with hereditary cataract]," Shvedova AA;
Platonov ES; Polianskii NB; Babizhaev MA; Kagan VE Biull Eksp Biol Med, 1987
Mar, 103:3, 301-4. **"The content of diene conjugates (lipid hydroperoxides)
was shown to be significantly higher in lipids extracted from the lenses of
mice with hereditary cataract than in the controls. The same holds true for
characteristics of fluorescence of the end-product of lipid peroxidation."**
"It was established that high-molecular weight fluorescent fractions
corresponded to lipid components of **lipofuscin-like pigments.** NMR and mass
spectrometry of low-molecular weight fractions suggested that they contained
predominantly products of free radical oxidation of **long chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids (C22:6). "**  

"Formation of N'-formylkynurenine in proteins from lens and other sources by
exposure to sunlight," Pirie A Biochem J, 1971 Nov, 125:1, 203-8.  

"Lipid fluorophores of the human crystalline lens with cataract." Babizhayev
MA Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol, 1989, 227:4, 384-91 "It has been
established that the development of cataract is accompanied by the formation
of various fluorophores in the lipid fraction of the lens. These lipid-
fluorescing products have been separated chromatographically according to
polarity and molecular weight. It is shown that the initial stages of the
development of cataract are characterized by the appearance of lipid
fluorophores in the near ultraviolet and violet regions of the spectrum
**(excitation maximum 302-330 nm, emission maximum 411 nm) with low** polarity
and a small molecular weight; the maturing of the cataract is **characterized
by an increase in the intensity of the long-wave fluorescence of the lipids in
the blue-green region (430-480 nm) and by the formation of** polymeric high-
molecular-weight fluorescing lipid products with high polarity. It has been
demonstrated that the appearance of lipid fluorophores in the **crystalline
lens is associated with the free radical oxidative modification of the
phospholipids and fatty acids in cataract."**  

"Incidence of cataracts in the mobile eye hospitals of Nepal," Brandt F; Malla
OK; Pradhan YM; Prasad LN; Rai NC; Pokharel RP; Lakhe S, Graefes Arch Clin Exp
Ophthalmol, 1982, 218:1, 25-7 The incidence of cataract in Nepal was
determined from data collected in 14 mobile eye hospitals (called 'eye
camps'). Of a total of **12,217** patients examined in the out-patient
department (OPD), cataract surgery was performed on 2,163. The percentage of
cataract patients in the OPD was **less in the mountains (13.8%) than in the
Tarai plains (19.8%).** In the inhabitants of the mountains, the majority of
whom belong to the Tibeto-Birman race, **cataracts appeared at a significantly
later age in both males and females compared to the people of the plains, who
are mostly Indo-Aryan.** Cataracts were discovered in both groups at a younger
age in women than in men."  

"Associations among cataract prevalence, sunlight hours, and altitude in the
Himalayas." Brilliant LB; Grasset NC; Pokhrel RP; Kolstad A; Lepkowski JM;
Brilliant GE; Hawks WN; Pararajasegaram R., Am J Epidemiol 118:2, 250-64
1983\. "The relationship between cataract prevalence, altitude, and sunlight
hours was investigated in a **large national probability sample survey of 105
sites** in the Himalayan kingdom of Nepal, December 1980 through April 1981.
Cataract of senile or unknown etiology was diagnosed by ophthalmologists in
873 of **30,565** **full-time life-long residents** of survey sites.
Simultaneously, the altitude of sites was measured using a standard mountain
altimeter. Seasonally adjusted average daily duration of sunlight exposure for
each site was calculated by a method which took into account latitude and
obstructions along the skyline. Age- and sex-standardized **cataract
prevalence was 2.7 times higher in sites at an altitude of 185 meters or less
than in sites over 1000 meters. Cataract prevalence was negatively correlated
with altitude** (r = -0.533, p less than 0.0001). However, a positive
correlation between cataract prevalence and sunlight was observed (r = 0.563,
p less than 0.0001). Sites with an average of 12 hours of sunlight exposure
had 3.8 times as much cataract as sites with an average of only seven hours of
exposure. Sunlight was blocked from reaching certain high altitude sites by
tall neighboring mountains. "  

**"The untenability of the sunlight hypothesis of cataractogenesis** ,"
Harding JJ Doc Ophthalmol 88:3-4, 345-9, 1994-95. "The excess prevalence of
cataract in **third world countries led early this century to the hypothesis
that sunlight causes cataract. The hypothesis, which ignored differences in
diet, culture, poverty and prevalence of other diseases** such as diarrhoea,
received little support until about thirty years ago when biochemical studies
were set up to explore the browning of lens proteins, which is a common
feature of cataract on the Indian subcontinent. Initially these studies were
encouraging in that exposure to sunlight caused some changes seen in
cataractous lenses, but eventually the hypothesis was rejected because the
first change in the laboratory was the destruction of tryptophan, **but this
was not found in brown cataract lenses.** A brown nuclear cataract could not
be produced artificially in the laboratory using sunlight or UV exposure.
Exposure of laboratory animals has produced lens opacities, but in most
experiments the doses required have also caused keratitis, conjunctivitis,
iritis and inflammation. The cornea seems more sensitive than the lens, which
is not surprising, as it gets the first chance to absorb damaging UV. The
biochemical rejection of the hypothesis coincided with the re-start of the
epidemiological studies. Most of these are simply latitude studies and are no
more than a repeat of what was available sixty years ago. They do not help to
find a cause. **Two studies showed that cataract was less common at higher
altitude in the Himalayas, but unfortunately led to opposing conclusions**. On
the basis of common knowledge that UV exposure was greater at higher altitude,
the first altitude study led to the rejection of the sunlight hypothesis."  

"Anticataract action of vitamin E: its estimation using an in vitro steroid
cataract model," Ohta Y; Okada H; Majima Y; Ishiguro I Ophthalmic Res, 1996,
28 Suppl 2:, 16-25 The aim of this study was to estimate the anticataract
action of vitamin E using an in vitro methylprednisolone (MP)-induced cataract
model. The same severity of early cortical cataract was induced in lenses
isolated from male Wistar rats aged 6 weeks by incubation with MP (1.5 mg/ml)
in TC-199 medium. The cataractous lenses showed slight increases in lipid
peroxide (LPO) content and Na+/K+ ratio and slight decreases in reduced
glutathione (GSH) content and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAP-
DH), a sensitive index of oxidative stress, and Na+,K(+)-ATPase activities.
When the cataractous lenses were further incubated in TC-199 medium with and
without vitamin E (250 micrograms/ml) for 48 h, the progression of cataract
was prevented in the vitamin E-treated lenses, but not in the vitamin
E-untreated lenses. The vitamin E-untreated lenses showed a decrease in
vitamin E content and an increase in water content in addition to further
increases in LPO content and Na+/K+ ratio and further decreases in GSH content
and GAP-DH and Na+,K(+)-ATPase activities. In contrast, the changes of these
components and enzymes except for GSH were attenuated in the vitamin E-treated
lenses. From these results, it can be estimated that vitamin E prevents in
vitro cataractogenesis in rat lenses treated with MP by protecting the lenses
against oxidative damage and loss of membrane function. "  

"Prevention of oxidative damage to rat lens by pyruvate in vitro: possible
attenuation in vivo," Varma SD; Ramachandran S; Devamanoharan PS; Morris SM;
Ali AH,.Curr Eye Res, 1995 Aug, 14:8, 643-9 Studies have been conducted to
assess the possible preventive effect of pyruvate against lens protein
oxidation and consequent denaturation and insolubilization. Rat lens organ
culture system was used for these studies. The content of water insoluble
proteins (urea soluble) increased if the lenses were cultured in medium
containing hydrogen peroxide. Incorporation of pyruvate in the medium
prevented such insolubilization. The insolubilization was associated primarily
with loss of gamma crystallin fraction of the soluble proteins. PAGE analysis
demonstrated that insolubilization is related to -S-S- bond formation which
was preventable by pyruvate. Since pyruvate is a normal tissue metabolite the
findings are considered pathophysiologically significant against cataract
formation. This was apparent by the **prevention of selenite cataract in vivo
by intraperitoneal administration of pyruvate.**   

"Glucocorticoid-induced cataract in chick embryo monitored by Raman
spectroscopy," Mizuno A; Nishigori H; Iwatsuru M Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci,
30:1, 132-7, 1989. Glucocorticoid-induced cataract lens in chick embryo was
monitored by laser Raman spectroscopy. The lens opacity that appeared in chick
embryo is a reversible one. Raman spectra show no significant change in the
relative content of water or secondary structure of the proteins upon lens
opacification. The intensity ratios of tyrosine doublet bands in Raman spectra
between clear and opaque lens portions are changes. **This change is
reversible,** and **is interpreted as a protein-water phase separation that
occurred during lens opacification**.  

[NMR study of the state of water in the human lens during cataract
development] Babizhaev MA; Deev AI; Nikolaev GM, Biofizika 30:4, 671-4,1985.
Water proton spin-spin relaxation times (T2) and the content of bound, "non-
freezable" at -9 degrees C water in both normal human lenses and human lenses
of different stages of cataract progression (cataracta incipiens, nondum
matura, mature hypermatura) were measured by NMR spin echoes method. By the
stage of cataracta nondum matura, increase of bound water content and
simultaneous, almost half decrease of the relaxation time (T2), were observed.
However, on the following stages of cataract evaluation (almost mature, mature
cataracts) **a gradual decrease of bound water content is noted,** but only
for the mature cataract stage the water content significantly differs from
that of the normal one. On the stage of hypermature cataract the presence of
two unexchanged with each other fractions of water is found. The obtained data
are **explained by lens protein reconstructions during the cataract
progression.**   

Hightower KR; Reddy VN Ca++-induced cataract. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci,
1982 Feb, 22:2, 263-7 Cataracts in cultured rabbit lenses were produced by
elevation of internal calcium. Experimental procedures were successful in
increasing levels of total and bound Ca++, often without significant changes
in sodium, potassium, or water content. Although the excess in calcium was
predominantly associated with water-soluble proteins and was freely
diffusible, a significant amount was bound to membranes and cytosol water-
insoluble proteins. Thus, in lenses with a 10-fold increase in total Ca++, the
bound Ca++ increased twofold, nearly 35% of which remained fixed to water-
insoluble and membrane proteins after exhaustive (72 hr) dialysis. In
contrast, over 95% of the Ca++ in water-soluble protein fractions was removed
by dialysis.  

[Use of pyrimidine bases and ATP for conservative treatment of early
cataracts] Larionov LN Oftalmol Zh, 1977, 32:3, 221-2.  

"Noninvasive measurements of pyridine nucleotide and flavoprotein in the
lens," Tsubota K; Laing RA; Kenyon KR Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 28:5, 785-9,
1987\. " **Abnormalities in glucose metabolism are thought to be among the
main causes of cataract formation.** The authors have made noninvasive
biochemical measurements of the lens that provide information concerning
glucose metabolism in the lens epithelium. The autofluorescence of reduced
pyridine nucleotides (PN) and oxidized flavoproteins (Fp) within the rabbit
lens were noninvasively measured as a function of depth using redox
fluorometry. The peak of the autofluorescence at 440 nm (excited at 360 nm)
and 540 nm **(excited at 460 nm) were determined at the lens epithelium. When
8 mM sodium pentobarbital, a known inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, was
applied to the lens, the autofluorescence peak at 440 nm increased and that at
540 nm decreased. The 440 nm autofluorescence is thought to be from** reduced
pyridine nucleotides, whereas the 540 nm autofluorescence is from the oxidized
flavoprotein. Blocking lens respiration with pentobarbital caused an increase
in the PN/Fp ratio by a factor of 3 within 3.5 hr after pentobarbital
application."  

"Concentrations of some ribonucleotides, L-lactate, and pyruvate in human
senile cataractous lenses with special reference to anterior
capsular/subcapsular opacity," Laursen AB Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 54:6,
677-92,1976. The concentrations of some ribonucleoside tri- and diphosphates,
adenosine-5'-monophosphate, L-lactate and pyruvate were determined in human
senile cataractous lenses removed during cataract operations. Pyruvate
concentrations were found to be negligible (median = 56 mumol/kg lens wet
weight) in 15 human senile cataractous lenses. On the basis of correlations
between the biomicroscopic appearances of the senile cataractous lenses (N =
80) and the concentrations and ratios of the metabolites in question, the
following classification was found to be justified: 1. Immature cataractous
lenses without anterior capsular/subcapsular opacity: high levels of
ribonucleoside triphosphates (RTP), high sums of RTP, ribonucleoside
diphosphates (RDP), and adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP) as well as **high
levels of L-lactate and high ratios of L-lactate in the lens/L-lactate in the
aqueous**. 2. Immature cataractous lenses with anterior capsular/subcapsular
opacity; intermediate levels of RTP, intermediate values for the sums of RTP,
RDP, and AMP, **high L-lactate levels, and intermediate values of the ratios
of L-lactate in the lens/L-lactate in the aqueous."**  

"Lipid fluorophores of the human crystalline lens with cataract," Babizhayev
MA Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol, 1989, 227:4, 384-91. [Initial stages of
cataracts are characterized by the fluorescence of the products of fatty acid
free radical oxidation.]

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

