![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  

**  
Tryptophan, serotonin, and aging**

Beginning with the industrial production of glutamic acid (sold as MSG,
monosodium glutamate), the public has been systematically misinformed about
the effects of amino acids in the diet. The FDA has been industry's powerful
ally in misleading the public. Despite research that clearly showed that
adults assimilate whole proteins more effectively than free amino acids, much
of the public has been led to believe that predigested hydrolized protein
and manufactured free amino acids are more easily assimilated than real
proteins, and that they are not toxic. Even if free amino acids could be
produced industrially without introducing toxins and allergens, they wouldn't
be appropriate for nutritional use.

Although some research shows that babies up to the age of 18 months can
assimilate free amino acids, a baby formula containing hydrolyzed protein was
associated with decreased serum albumin, which suggests that it interfered
with protein synthesis.

The myth that free amino acids are natural nutritional substances has been
used to promote the use of many products besides MSG, including aspartame,
chelated minerals, and tryptophan.

Although several amino acids can be acutely or chronically toxic, even lethal,
when too much is eaten, tryptophan is the only amino acid that is also
carcinogenic. (It can also produce a variety of toxic metabolites, and it is
very susceptible to damage by radiation.) Since tryptophan is the precursor of
serotonin, the amount of tryptophan in the diet can have important effects on
the way the organism responds to stress, and the way it develops, adapts, and
ages.

When an inflammatory disease (eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome) was noticed in
people using tryptophan tablets (1989-90), there was an intense campaign to
exonerate the tryptophan itself by blaming the reaction on an impurity in one
company's product. But the syndrome didn't occur only in the people who used
that company's product, and similar changes can be produced by a high-
tryptophan diet (Gross, et al., 1999).

There are people who advocate the use of tryptophan supplementation or other
means to increase serotonin in the tissues as a treatment for the fibromyalgia
syndrome, but the evidence increasingly suggests that excessive serotonin,
interfering with muscle mitochondria, is a major factor in the development of
that syndrome.

In 1965, Hans Selye showed that the injection of serotonin caused muscular
dystrophy. Subsequent studies suggest that serotonin excess is involved in
both muscular and nervous dystrophy or degeneration. (O'Steen, 1967; Narukami,
et al., 1991; Hanna and Peat, 1989.)

The fatigue produced by over-training is probably produced by a tryptophan
and serotonin overload, resulting from catabolism of muscle proteins and
stress-induced increases in serotonin. Muscle catabolism also releases a large
amount of cysteine, and cysteine, methionine, and tryptophan suppress thyroid
function (Carvalho, et al., 2000). Stress also liberates free fatty acids from
storage, and these fatty acids increase the uptake of tryptophan into the
brain, increasing the formation of serotonin. Since serotonin increases ACTH
and cortisol secretion, the catabolic state tends to be self-perpetuating.
This process is probably a factor influencing the rate of aging, and
contributing to the physiological peculiarities of aging and depression.

Malnutrition, and specifically protein deficiency, produces an inflammatory
state that involves extreme serotonin dominance. Stress or malnutrition
prenatally or in infancy leads to extreme serotonin dominance in adulthood.
Other functions of tryptophan are reduced, as more of it is turned into
serotonin.

Decreasing tryptophan or decreasing serotonin improves learning and alertness,
while increased serotonin impairs learning.

Tryptophan is an essential amino acid for reproduction and growth of the young
animal. Most research on the nutritional requirements for amino acids has been
done on farm animals, because of the economic incentive to find the cheapest
way to produce the fastest growth. Farmers aren't interested in the
nutritional factors that would produce the longest-lived pigs. Some research
has been done on the amino acid requirements of rats over a significant part
of their short lifespans. In rats and farm animals, the amount of tryptophan
required decreases with time as the rate of growth slows.

In some ways, rats never really mature, since they keep growing for nearly
their whole lifespan. Their growth stops just a short time before they die,
which is usually around the age of two or three years. (At this age, rats'
cells still retain approximately the same high water content seen in the cells
of a two year-old child.) They usually become infertile about half-way through
their lifespan. If we try to draw conclusions about amino acid requirements
from the rat studies, I think we would want to extrapolate the curve for the
decreasing need for tryptophan, far beyond the point seen during the rat's
short life. And those requirements were determined according to the amounts
that produced a maximum rate of growth, using the index of the pig farmers, as
if the rats were being studied for possible use as meat.

When rats were fed a diet completely lacking tryptophan for a short period, or
a diet containing only one fourth of the normal amount for a more prolonged
period, the results were surprising **:** They kept the ability to reproduce
up to the age of 36 months (versus 17 months for the rats on the usual diet),
and both their average longevity and their maximum longevity increased
significantly. They looked and acted like younger rats. (A methionine-poor
diet also has dramatic longevity-increasing effects.)

On the tryptophan-poor diet, the amount of serotonin in the brain decreased.
When brain serotonin decreases, the level of testosterone in male animals
increases. More than 20 years ago, a chemical (p-chlorophenylalanine) that
inhibits serotonin synthesis was found to tremendously increase libido.

In old age, the amount of serotonin in the brain increases. This undoubtedly
is closely related to the relative inability to turn off cortisol production
that is characteristic of old age (Sapolsky and Donnelly, 1985).
Hypothyroidism increases the formation of serotonin, as does cortisol (Henley,
et al., 1997, 1998; Neckers and Sze, 1976).

In white hair, the amount of tryptophan is higher than in hair of any other
color. Although serotonin and tryptophan are very important during rapid
growth, their presence in senile tissues is probably closely associated with
the processes of decline. The hair loss that occurs in hypothyroidism,
postpartum syndrome, and with the use of drugs such as St. John's wort (which
can also cause the serotonin syndrome) could be another effect of excess
serotonin.

Serotonin stimulates cell division and tends to increase the formation of
connective tissue, so its formation should be closely regulated once full
growth is achieved. It contributes to the age- or stress-related thickening of
blood vessels, and other fibrotic processes that impair organ function.

The metabolic rate (eating more without gaining extra weight) and ability to
regulate body temperature are increased by early tryptophan deprivation.
(Ashley and Curzon, 1981; Segall and Timiras, 1975.) The ability to oxidize
sugar is impaired by serotonin, and several drugs with antiserotonin actions
are being used to treat diabetes and its complications, such as hypertension,
obesity, and foot ulcers.

An excess of tryptophan early in life, stress, or malnutrition, activates the
system for converting tryptophan into serotonin, and that tendency persists
into adulthood, modifying pituitary function, and increasing the incidence of
pituitary and other cancers.

Serotonin's contribution to high blood pressure is well established. It
activates the adrenal cortex both directly and through activation of the
pituitary. It stimulates the production of both cortisol and aldosterone. It
also activates aldosterone secretion by way of the renin-angiotensin system.
Angiotensin is an important promoter of inflammation, and contributes to the
degeneration of blood vessels with aging and stress. **It can also promote
estrogen production.**

In the traditional diet, rather than just eating muscle meats, all the animal
parts were used. Since collagen makes up about 50% of the protein in an
animal, and is free of tryptophan, this means that people were getting about
half as much tryptophan in proportion to other amino acids when they used
foods such as head cheese, ox-tails, and chicken feet.

While some of the toxic effects of an excess of individual amino acids have
been investigated, and some of the protective or harmful interactions
resulting from changing the ratios of the amino acids have been observed, the
fact that there are about 20 amino acids in our normal diet means that there
is an enormous number of possibilities for harmful or beneficial interactions.

The optimal quantity of protein in the diet has traditionally been treated as
if it were a matter that could be resolved just by observing the rate of
growth when a certain protein is given in certain quantities, along with
standard amounts of calories and other nutrients. This kind of research has
been useful to farmers who want to find the cheapest foods that will produce
the biggest animals in the shortest time. But that kind of research climate
has spread a degraded concept of nutrition into the culture at large,
influencing medical ideas of nutrition, the attitudes of consumers, and the
policies of governmental regulatory agencies.

When synthetic amino acids are used to supplement natural proteins, they are
usually chosen according to irrelevant models of the ideal protein's
composition, and many toxic contaminants are invariably present in the
synthetic free amino acids.

For the present, the important thing is to avoid the use of the least
appropriate food products, while choosing natural foods that have historical,
epidemiological, and biochemical justification.

Whey has been promoted as a protein supplement, but it contains a slightly
higher proportion of tryptophan than milk does. Cheese (milk with the whey
removed) contains less tryptophan. Some people have been encouraged to eat
only the whites of eggs, to avoid cholesterol, but the egg albumin is rich
in tryptophan.

The expensive tender cuts of meat contain excessive amounts of cysteine and
tryptophan, but bone broth (gelatin) and the tougher cuts of meat contain more
gelatin, which lacks those amino acids. Many fruits are deficient in
tryptophan, yet have very significant quantities of the other amino acids.
They also contain some of the carbon skeleton (keto-acid) equivalents of the
essential amino acids, which can be converted to protein in the body.

Serotonin excess produces a broad range of harmful effects **:** Cancer,
inflammation, fibrosis, neurological damage, shock, bronchoconstriction, and
hypertension, for example. Increased serotonin impairs learning, serotonin
antagonists improve it.

The simplest, nonessential, amino acid, glycine, has been found to protect
against carcinogenesis, inflammation, fibrosis, neurological damage, shock,
asthma, and hypertension. Increased glycine improves learning (Handlemann, et
al., 1989; File, et al., 1999), glycine antagonists usually impair it. Its
antitoxic and cytoprotective actions are remarkable. Collagen, besides being
free of tryptophan, contains a large amount of glycine--32% of its amino acid
units, 22% of its weight.

The varied antiinflammatory and protective effects of glycine can be thought
of as an antiserotonin action. For example, serotonin increases the formation
of TNF (tumor necrosis factor, also called cachectin), glycine inhibits it. In
some situations, glycine is known to suppress the formation of serotonin.
**Antagonists of serotonin can potentiate glycine's effects** (Chesnoy-
Marchais, et al., 2000). People who ate traditional diets, besides getting a
lower concentration of tryptophan, were getting a large amount of glycine in
their gelatin-rich diet.

Gelatin, besides being a good source of glycine, also contains a large amount
of proline, which has some antiexcitatory properties similar to glycine.

If a half-pound of steak is eaten, it would probably be reasonable to have
about 20 grams of gelatin at approximately the same time. Even a higher ratio
of gelatin to muscle meat might be preferable.

Carbon dioxide, high altitude, thyroid, progesterone, caffeine, aspirin, and
decreased tryptophan consumption protect against excessive serotonin release.
When sodium intake is restricted, there is a sharp increase in serotonin
secretion. This accounts for some of the antiinflammatory and diuretic effects
of increased sodium consumption--increasing sodium lowers both serotonin and
adrenalin.

The polyunsaturated oils interact closely with serotonin and tryptophan, and
the short and medium chain saturated fatty acids have antihistamine and
antiserotonin actions. Serotonin liberates free fatty acids from the tissues,
especially the polyunsaturated fats, and these in turn liberate serotonin from
cells such as the platelets, and liberate tryptophan from serum albumin,
increasing its uptake and the formation of serotonin in the brain. Saturated
fats don't liberate serotonin, and some of them, such as capric acid found in
coconut oil, relax blood vessels, while linoleic acid constricts blood vessels
and promotes hypertension. Stress, exercise, and darkness, increase the
release of free fatty acids, and so promote the liberation of tryptophan and
formation of serotonin. Increased serum linoleic acid is specifically
associated with serotonin-dependent disorders such as migraine.

Coconut oil, because of its saturated fatty acids of varied chain length, and
its low linoleic acid content, should be considered as part of a protective
diet.

In the collagen theory of aging, it is argued that changes in the
extracellular matrix are responsible for isolating cells from their
environment, reducing the availability of nutrients and oxygen, and reducing
their ability to send and receive the chemical signals that are needed for
correct adaptive functioning.

In diabetes, basement membranes are thickened, and in a given volume of tissue
there are fewer capillaries. This effect probably involves excessive serotonin
__ (Kasho, et al., 1998). Old animals contain a higher proportion of collagen.
Old tendons (or tendons that have been exposed to excessive estrogen, which
stimulates the formation of collagen) are more rigid, and behave almost as if
they have been partly cooked. In diseases such as carcinoid, in which very
large amounts of serotonin are released systemically, fibrosis is exaggerated,
and may be the direct cause of death. Radiation and oxygen deprivation also
lead to increased tissue fibrosis.

In specific fibrotic conditions, such as cirrhosis of the liver, it is known
that glycine and saturated fats can reverse the fibrosis. In fibrosis of the
heart, thyroid hormone is sometimes able to reverse the condition.

I think these facts imply that excessive tryptophan, estrogen, and
polyunsaturated fats contribute significantly, maybe decisively, to the
degenerative changes that occur in aging. Experiments have separately shown
that reducing dietary tryptophan or unsaturated fats can extend the healthy
lifespan, and several antiestrogenic interventions (removal of the pituitary,
or supplementing with progesterone) can slow age-related changes and delay
degenerative diseases. Since these factors interact, each tending to promote
the others, and also interact with exogenous toxins, excess iron accumulation,
and other stressors, it would be reasonable to expect greater results when
several of the problems are corrected at the same time.

**REFERENCES**

Toxicol Pathol 1998 May-Jun;26(3):395-402. **Glycine modulates the toxicity of
benzyl acetate in F344 rats.** Abdo KM, Wenk ML, Harry GJ, Mahler J, Goehl TJ,
Irwin RD. These results suggest that the neurodegeneration induced by BA is
mediated by a depletion of the glycine pool and the subsequent
excitotoxicity.

Res Clin Stud Headache 1978;6:110-6. **Role of individual free fatty acids in
migraine.** Anthony M Total plasma free fatty acids, platelet serotonin
content and plasma stearic, palmitic, oleic and linoleic acids were estimated
in 10 migraine patients before, during and after a migraine attack. Total and
individual plasma free fatty acid levels rose and platelet serotonin content
fell in most patients. **The highest rise was observed in linoleic acid, which
is known to be a potent liberator of platelet serotonin in vitro** and is the
only precursor of all prostaglandins in the body. It is suggested that the
rise in plasma levels of **linoleic acid in migraine could be responsible for
the platelet serotonin release observed during the attack.**

Clin Exp Neurol 1978;15:190-6. **Individual free fatty acids and migraine.**
Anthony M Total plasma free fatty acids (FFAs), platelet serotonin content and
plasma stearic, palmitic, oleic and linoleic acids were estimated in 10
migrainous patients before, during and after a migraine attack. Total and
individual plasma FFA levels rose and platelet serotonin fell in most
patients. Comparison of the pre-headache and headache mean values showed that
of the FFAs linoleic acid rises most during headache. **10 non-migrainous
controls had platelet serotonin content estimated before and after the
ingestion of 20g linoleic acid. All showed a significant fall in platelet
serotonin in the post-ingestion period. It is shown that linoleic acid
releases platelet serotonin in vitro, and this study suggests that it has the
same action in vivo.** Further, it is the precursor of all prostaglandins in
the body and its marked elevation during migraine may serve as a source of
increased prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) synthesis. It is **suggested that linoleic
acid plays an important role in the biochemical process of the migraine
attack, acting both as a serotonin releasing factor and a source** of PGF1,
the vasodilating action of which can aggravate the clinical symptoms of
migraine.

J Appl Physiol 1993 Jun;74(6):3006-12. **Neuroendocrine and substrate
responses to altered brain 5-HT activity during prolonged exercise to
fatigue.** Bailey SP, Davis JM, Ahlborn EN. Pharmacological manipulation of
brain serotonergic [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] activity affects run time to
exhaustion in the rat. These effects may be mediated by neurochemical,
hormonal, or substrate mechanisms. Groups of rats were decapitated during
rest, after 1 h of treadmill running (20 m/min, 5% grade), and at exhaustion.
Immediately before exercise rats were injected intraperitoneally with 1 mg/kg
of quipazine dimaleate (QD; a 5-HT agonist), 1.5 mg/kg of LY 53857 (LY; a 5-HT
antagonist), or the vehicle (V; 0.9% saline). LY increased and QD decreased
time to exhaustion (approximately 28 and 32%, respectively; P < 0.05). Brain
5-HT and 5-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid **concentrations were higher at 1 h of
exercise than at rest (P < 0.05), and the latter increased even further at
fatigue in the midbrain and striatum (P <** 0.05).

Neurochem Int 1993 Sep;23(3):269-83. **Glutamate, GABA, glycine and taurine
modulate serotonin synthesis and release in rostral and caudal rhombencephalic
raphe cells in primary cultures.** Becquet D, Hery M, Francois-Bellan AM,
Giraud P, Deprez P, Faudon M, Fache MP, Hery F.

Acta Physiol Scand 2001 Oct;173(2):223-30. **Exercise-induced changes in brain
glucose and serotonin revealed by microdialysis in rat hippocampus: effect of
glucose supplementation.** Bequet F, Gomez-Merino D, Berthelot M, Guezennec
CY.

Amino Acids 2001;20(1):25-34. **Amino acids and central fatigue.** Blomstrand
E. There is an increasing interest in the mechanisms behind central fatigue,
particularly in relation to changes in brain monoamine metabolism and the
influence of specific amino acids on fatigue. **When the 5-HT level was
elevated in this way the performance was impaired in both rats and human
subjects, and in accordance with this a decrease in the 5-HT level caused an
improvement in running performance in rats. The precursor of 5-HT is the amino
acid tryptophan and the synthesis of 5-HT in the brain is thought to be
regulated by the blood** supply of free tryptophan in relation to other large
neutral amino acids (including the branched-chain amino acids, BCAA) since
these compete with tryptophan for transport into the brain.

J Neurol Sci 1988 Apr;84(2-3):239-46. **Increased platelet aggregation and
release reaction in myotonic dystrophy.** Bornstein NM, Zahavi M, Korczyn AD,
Zahavi J.

Curr Med Chem 2001 Sep;8(11):1257-74. **The inhibitory neural circuitry as
target of antiepileptic drugs.** Bohme I, Luddens H. Impairments and defects
in the inhibitory neurotransmission in the CNS can contribute to various
seizure disorders, i.e., gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine as the
main inhibitory neurotransmitters in the brain play a crucial role in some
forms of epilepsy.

Braz J Med Biol Res 2000 Mar;33(3):355-61. **Thyroid peroxidase activity is
inhibited by amino acids.** Carvalho DP, Ferreira AC, Coelho SM, Moraes JM,
Camacho MA, Rosenthal D

Q J Exp Psychol B 2000 Aug;53(3):225-38. **Rapid visual learning in the rat:
effects at the 5-HT1a receptor subtype.** Cassaday HJ, Simpson EL, Gaffan EA.
 **The 5-hydroxytryptamine1a (5-HT1a) receptor agonist 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-
propylamino) tetralin (8-OH-DPAT; 0.15 mg/kg) impaired rats' rapid visual
learning on a computerized maze. This treatment also increased decision time
(DT) but the learning impairment was not necessarily a side-effect of slower
responding because, in this task, responses made at long DT are more accurate
than those at short DT.**  Its reversal with WAY-100635 offers support to
the hypothesis that 5-HT1a receptor antagonists could improve cognitive
function, under conditions of pre-existing impairment due to overactive
serotonergic inhibition, as is thought to occur in Alzheimer's disease.

Med Sci Sports Exerc 1997 Jan;29(1):58-62. **Effects of acute physical
exercise on central serotonergic systems.** This paper reviews data
concerning the effects of acute physical exercise (treadmill running) in
trained rats. Works from the 1980's have established that **acute running
increases brain serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine: 5-HT) synthesis in two ways.
Lipolysis-elicited release of free fatty acids in the blood compartment
displaces the binding of the essential amino acid tryptophan to albumin,
thereby increasing the concentration of the so-called "free tryptophan"
portion, and because exercise increases the ratio of circulating free
tryptophan to the sum of the concentrations of the amino acids that compete
with tryptophan** for uptake at the blood-brain barrier level, tryptophan
enters markedly in the brain compartment. However, this marked increase in
central tryptophan levels increases only to a low extent brain 5-HT synthesis,
as assessed by the analysis of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels, thereby
suggesting that exercise promotes feedback regulatory mechanisms. Indirect
indices of 5-HT functions open the **possibility that acute exercise-induced
increases in 5-HT biosynthesis are associated with (or lead to) increases in
5-HT release.**

Int J Dev Neurosci 1997 Apr;15(2):257-63. **Postnatal changes of brain
monoamine levels in prenatally malnourished and control rats.** Chen JC,
Turiak G, Galler J, Volicer L.

Eur J Pharmacol 2000 Aug 25;402(3):205-13. **Glycinergic potentiation by some
5-HT(3) receptor antagonists: insight into** **selectivity.** Chesnoy-Marchais
D, Levi S, Acher F.

Mech Ageing Dev 1986 Oct;36(2):161-71. **Influence of low tryptophan diet on
survival and organ growth in mice.** De Marte ML, Enesco HE. Greater survival
and reduced growth were found to characterize mice on a tryptophan deficient
diet as compared to fully fed control mice. The 50% survival point was reached
by the tryptophan restricted group at 683 days, and by the control group at
616 days. Measurements of body weight, organ weight, and DNA level were made
at 8, 12, 24, 36, 52 and 78 weeks of age. Both whole body weight and organ
weight of liver, kidney, heart and spleen were about 30% lower in the
tryptophan restricted group as compared to the controls, so that the ratio of
organ weight to body weight remained at a constant value for both groups.
There was no significant change in cell number as determined by DNA
measurements, as a result of the tryptophan restriction.

J Clin Psychopharmacol 1999 Dec;19(6):506-12. **Beneficial effects of glycine
(bioglycin) on memory and attention in young and middle-aged adults.** File
SE, Fluck E, Fernandes C. .The effects of Bioglycin(Konapharma, Pratteln,
Switzerland), a biologically active form of the amino acid glycine, were . . .
studied in healthy students (mean age, 20.7 years) and middle-aged men (mean
age, 58.9 years) with tests that measured attention, memory and mood, using a
double-blind, randomized, crossover design. Compared with the young group, the
middle-aged group had significantly poorer verbal episodic memory, focused,
divided, and sustained attention; they also differed in their subjective
responses at the end of testing. Bioglycin significantly improved retrieval
from episodic memory in both the young and the middle-aged groups, but it did
not affect focused or divided attention. However, the middle-aged men
significantly benefited from Bioglycin in the sustained-attention task. The
effects of Bioglycin differed from those of other cognitive enhancers in that
it was without stimulant properties or significant effects on mood, and it
primarily improved memory rather than attention. It is likely to be of benefit
in young or older people in situations where high retrieval of information is
needed or when performance is impaired by jet lag, shift work, or disrupted
sleep. It may also benefit the impaired retrieval shown in patients with
schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's disease.

Brain Res 1997 Sep 12;768(1-2):43-8. **Mobilization of arachidonate and
docosahexaenoate by stimulation of the 5-HT2A receptor in rat C6 glioma
cells.** Garcia MC, Kim HY Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics,
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA. **In this study, we demonstrate that
astroglial 5-HT2A receptors are linked to the mobilization of polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFA). Stimulation of C6 glioma** cells, prelabeled with
[3H]arachidonate (AA, 20:4n6) and [14C]docosahexaenoate (DHA, 22:6n3), with
serotonin and the 5-HT(2A/2C) receptor agonist
(+/-)-2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine hydrochloride (DOI) resulted in the
mobilization of both [3H] and [14C] into the supernatant of the cell
monolayers. The increased radioactivity in the supernatant was mainly
associated with free fatty acids. These results indicate that the 5-HT2A
receptor is coupled to the mobilization of PUFA.

Neurosci Lett 1995 May 5;190(2):143-5. **Serotonin involvement in the
spontaneous alternation ability: a behavioral study in tryptophan-restricted
rats.** Gonzalez-Burgos I, Olvera-Cortes E, Del Angel-Meza AR, Feria-Velasco
A. Laboratorio de Psicobiologia, Centro de Investigacion Biomedica de
Occidente, IMSS, Guadalajara, Jal., Mexico. Spontaneous alternation (SA) is
controlled by septal cholinergic terminals in the hippocampus. Serotoninergic
terminals end on cholinergic nerve endings in the hippocampus, and their
possible role in SA was investigated in rats fed with a tryptophan-deficient
diet, from weaning to 60 days of age. **A T-maze was used for the test. At the
age of 40 days, an increase in SA occurred in the tryptophan deficient rats,**
although this effect disappeared by 60 days of age. A modulatory role of
serotonin in the psychoneural control of SA is suggested, and it may be
through presynaptic inhibition of hippocampal cholinergic terminals.

Physiol Behav 1998 Jan;63(2):165-9. **Effect of tryptophan restriction on
short-term memory.** Gonzalez-Burgos I, Perez-Vega MI, Del Angel-Meza **** AR,
Feria-Velasco A. Centro de Investigacion Biomedica de Michoacan, Instituto
Mexicano del Seguro Social, Morelia. Several brain regions are involved in the
learning process that is integrated from sensorial inputs. It is thereafter
consolidated in short- (STM) or long-term memory. Serotonin is strongly
related to both types of memory, and particularly, to STM, however, its
regulatory role is still unclear. In this study, the effects of tryptophan
(TRY) restriction on learning and STM were evaluated. Ten Sprague-Dawley
female rats were fed with a TRY-restricted diet (0.15g/100g) starting from
postnatal Day 21. At 21, 40, and 60 days of age, 5 trials per animal were
carried out in a "hard-floor"-Biel maze, after 24 h of water abstinence. The
number of errors per trial were registered before reaching **** the goal. **At
both 40 and 60 days, experimental rats committed less errors than controls.
Likewise, the TRY-restricted group learned the task from the second trial on,
whereas controls did not solve it until the third trial.** TRY restriction,
and therefore brain serotonin reduction, could impair normal cholinergic
activity in some areas such as the hippocampus and the cerebral cortex, where
involvement in learning and memory is well documented. Morphological and
neurochemical plastic events could also be related to the more efficient
performance of the task by the TRY-restricted rats.

Am J Physiol 1997 Jul;273(1 Pt 2):R324-30. **Mechanisms in the pressor effects
of hepatic portal venous fatty acid infusion.** Grekin RJ, Dumont CJ, Vollmer
AP, Watts SW, Webb RC Portal venous infusion of oleate solution has pressor
effects. We have examined efferent mechanisms, measured the response to
sustained infusion, and determined the effect of linoleate. Eight conscious
animals received concurrent infusions of prazosin or vehicle with portal
venous infusion of oleate. Oleate alone **increased mean arterial pressure
from 109.0 +/- 4.1 to 123.0 +/- 5.8 mmHg (P = 0.02), whereas no increase in
blood pressure occurred when oleate was infused** with prazosin. In 10 rats,
concurrent infusion of losartan had no effect on the pressor activity of
portal oleate infusion. Twenty-two animals received portal oleate or vehicle
as a continuous infusion for 7 days. Mean arterial pressure (126.1 +/- 2.0 vs.
107.8 +/- 2.6 mmHg, P < 0.001) and heart rate (383 +/- 5 vs. 366 +/- 5, P =
0.0257) were increased in oleate-infused animals. No differences in plasma
fatty acids, glucose, insulin, pressor hormones, liver enzymes, or in vitro
arterial pressor responsiveness were observed. Portal venous infusion of
**linoleate increased arterial pressure by 12.2 +/- 3.2 mmHg (P = 0.033).
These results indicate that alpha-adrenergic activity is necessary for the
acute pressor effects of portal oleate, that sustained portal oleate infusion
results in persistent blood pressure elevation, and that other long-chain
fatty acids besides oleate have pressor effects.**

Adv Exp Med Biol 1999;467:507-16. **Tryptophan toxicity--time and dose
response in rats.** Gross B, Ronen N, Honigman S, Livne E. During the past
decade L-tryptophan (Trp) ingestion have been associated with a multisystemic
syndrome, known as eosinophilia myalgia syndrome (EMS). Even though an
epidemic studies indicated that a contaminant, 1,1'-ethylidene-bis-L-
tryptophan was involved in EMS, **abnormalities in metabolism of Trp have been
reported in other similar clinical syndromes such as carcinoid syndrome,
scleroderma or eosinophilic fasciitis.** **Increased amounts of connective
tissue** **and induction of inflammatory cell proliferation were observed in
lung, spleen and in gastrocnemia muscle of rats treated with higher dose of
Trp for longer period.** Induction of kynurenine pathway by injection of p-CPA
caused more tissue damage. It is concluded that excessive Trp or elevation of
its metabolites could play a role in amplifying some of pathological features
of EMS. This pathological damage is further augmented by metabolites of the
kynurenine pathway.

Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 1999;99(2):12-20. **[Neuroprotective
effects of glycine in the acute period of ischemic stroke.]** [Article in
Russian] Gusev EI, Skvortsova VI, Komissarova IA, Dambinova SA, Raevskii KS,
Alekseev AA, Bashkatova VG, Kovalenko AV, Kudrin VS, Iakovleva EV.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1989 Dec;34(4):823-8. **Milacemide, a glycine prodrug,
enhances performance of learning tasks in normal and amnestic rodents.**
Handelmann GE, Nevins ME, Mueller LL, Arnolde SM, Cordi AA. Increasing
glycine concentrations in the brain by administration of a glycine prodrug,
milacemide, is shown here to enhance performance of a shock-motivated passive
avoidance task in rats, and to reverse drug-induced amnesia in a spontaneous
alternation paradigm in mice. These studies indicate a role of glycinergic
neurotransmission in memory processes, and support the therapeutic potential
of glycinergic drugs in memory impairment.

Pain 1989 Aug;38(2):145-50. **Ketanserin in reflex sympathetic dystrophy. A
double-blind placebo controlled cross-over trial.** Hanna MH, Peat SJ.

Synapse 1997 Sep;27(1):36-44. **Thyroid hormones and the treatment of
depression: an examination of basic hormonal actions in the mature mammalian
brain.** Henley WN, Koehnle TJ. The lack of mechanistic insight reflects, in
large part, **a longstanding bias that the mature mammalian central nervous
system is not an important target site for thyroid hormones.**

Am J Physiol 1997 Feb;272(2 Pt 2):H894-903. **Hypothyroid-induced changes in
autonomic control have a central serotonergic component.** Henley WN, Vladic
F. Three experiments were conducted in unanesthetized rats made hypothyroid
(Hypo) or maintained as euthyroid controls (Eu) to examine general
cardiovascular responsiveness [experiment I (Exp I)]; responsiveness to a
serotonin (5-HT2) agonist, dl-2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine [DOI
intracerebroventricularly; experiment II (Exp II)]; or responsiveness to a
5-HT(1A) agonist dl-8-hydroxydipropyl-aminotetralin hydrobromide [8-OH-DPAT
intracerebroventricularly; experiment III (Exp III)]. In Exp I, intravenous
infusions of phenylephrine and nitroprusside provided little evidence that
findings in Exp II and III were caused by generalized impairment in
cardiovascular responsiveness in Hypo. In Exp II and III, Eu and Hypo were
given either intra-arterial atropine or vehicle. Atropine significantly
elevated heart rate (Exp II and III) and mean arterial pressure (Exp II) in Eu
only. When compared with Eu, Hypo had a reduced pressor response (5.2 vs.
20.1%), an attenuated pulse pressure response (19.3 vs. 35.4%), and a more
robust bradycardia (-17.7 vs. -7.0%) in response to DOI. These differences
were atropine sensitive. In Exp III, Hypo had larger decrements in mean
arterial pressure (-9.0 vs. -5.1%), heart rate ( -13.9 vs. - 7.7%), and body
temperature (-4.5 vs. -2.7%) in response to 8-OH-DPAT in comparison to Eu.
Parasympathetic involvement in the differential responses to 8-OH-DPAT was
less clear than with DOI. Deranged autonomic control in hypothyroidism may be
caused, in part, by changes in central serotonergic activity.

Brain Res 1986 Mar;390(2):221-6. **Brain serotonin synthesis and Na+,K+-ATPase
activity are increased postnatally after prenatal administration of
L-tryptophan.** Hernandez-Rodriguez J, Chagoya G. The effect of prenatal
L-tryptophan supplementation on the serotonin (5-HT) synthesis and the
activity of Na+,K+-ATPase in the cerebral cortex was studied during postnatal
development, from birth up to day 30. A parallel and **significant elevation
of the serotonin content and the activity of tryptophan-5-hydroxylase was
observed in the brain of infant rats born to mothers treated with
L-tryptophan, as related to non-treated controls. The** activity of
Na+,K+-ATPase was also significantly elevated at the different ages studied
throughout the developmental period, as related to controls. These results
suggest an important role of L-tryptophan in the early regulation of the
**serotonin-synthesizing machinery, which lasts postnatally. Elevation of
ATPase activity seems to be associated to the elevation in the activity of the
5-HT system.**

Brain Res 1977 Mar 4;123(1):137-45. **Daily variations of various parameters
of serotonin metabolism in the rat brain. II. Circadian variations in serum
and cerebral tryptophan levels: lack of correlation with 5-HT turnover.** Hery
F, Chouvet G, Kan JP, Pujol JF, Glowinski J Significant circadian variations
in 5-HT and 5-HIAA levels were found in cerebral tissues. Important
significant circadian variations in free and total serum tryptophan levels
were also observed. In both cases, the maximal levels were found during the
middle of the dark phase after the peak of 5-HIAA levels. The diurnal
changes in tryptophan content in cerebral tissues seemed thus related to those
found in serum.

Kidney Int 1998 Oct;54(4):1083-92. **Serotonin enhances the production of type
IV collagen by human mesangial cells.** Kasho M, Sakai M, Sasahara T, Anami Y,
Matsumura T, Takemura T, Matsuda H, Kobori S, Shichiri M.

Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1977 Sep;7(3):245-52. **Fatty acid and tryptophan
changes on disturbing groups of rats and caging them singly.** Knott PJ,
Hutson PH, Curzon G The effects of disturbing groups of 24 hr fasted rats on
plasma unesterified fatty acid (UFA) and tryptophan concentrations and brain
tryptophan concentrations were investigated. Removing rats from cages rapidly
increased plasma UFA and corticosterone and decreased plasma and whole blood
tryptophan of cage mates. The disturbance also appeared to influence
biochemical values of rats in other cages within the same chamber. Effects
specific to individual cages were also suggested. In subsequent experiments 24
fasting rats caged together were rapidly transferred to 24 separate cages and
killed at intervals. Plasma UFA rose to a maximum by 12 min and then fell
toward initial values. Plasma total tryptophan concurrently fell then rose.
Its percentage in the free (ultrafilterable) state, and in some experiments
the absolute values of free tryptophan rose then fell. When the latter rise
was marked **then brain tryptophan and the 5-HT metabolite
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid rose.** Tyrosine changes were negligible. Thus
altered brain tryptophan level and 5-HT metabolism may be associated with
plasma tryptophan changes caused by brief environmental disturbance.

J Insect Physiol 2000 May 1;46(5):793-801. **Effect of an amino acid on
feeding preferences and learning behavior in the honey bee, Apis mellifera.**
Kim YS, Smith BH. **Subjects preferred to feed on a sucrose stimulus that
contained glycine, and the highest relative preference was recorded for the
highest concentration of glycine.**  **All concentrations of glycine
enhanced the rate and magnitude of a conditioned response to an odor . . .
.**

Eur J Pharmacol 1981 May 22;71(4):495-8. **Antagonism of L-glycine to seizures
induced by L-kynurenine, quinolinic acid and strychnine in mice.** Lapin IP.

Int J Circumpolar Health 1998;57 Suppl 1:386-8. **Seasonal variation of the
amino acid, L-tryptophan, in interior Alaska.** Levine ME, Duffy LK. The
seasonal pattern of L-tryptophan was studied in a Fairbanks, Alaska,
population that was unadapted to the extreme light variations of the North.
Previously, this population was shown to exhibit seasonal behavior effects
such as increases in fatigue and sleep duration, as well as endocrine effects
such as increases in melatonin levels and phase shifting. Prominent results
included finding increased levels in the winter at several different diurnal
time points. These findings support hypotheses which relate underlying
physiological adaptations to the North to the increased incidence of
behavioral disorders such as depression and alcoholism.

Infect Immun 2001 Sep;69(9):5883-91. **Dietary glycine prevents peptidoglycan
polysaccharide-induced reactive arthritis in the rat: role for glycine-gated
chloride channel.** Li X, Bradford BU, Wheeler MD, Stimpson SA, Pink HM,
Brodie TA, Schwab JH, Thurman RG.

J Neurol Sci 1989 Jan;89(1):27-35. **Polyamine biosynthetic decarboxylases in
muscles of rats with different experimental myopathies.** Lorenzini EC,
Colombo B, Ferioli ME, Scalabrino G, Canal N.

Int J Dev Neurosci 1996 Aug;14(5):641-8. **Nutritional recovery does not
reverse the activation of brain serotonin synthesis in the ontogenetically
malnourished rat.** Manjarrez GG, Magdaleno VM, Chagoya G, Hernandez J
Coordinacion de Investigacion Biomedica del Centro Medico Nacional, I.M.S.S.
Mexico, D.F. In the present work we confirm that gestational malnutrition
effects body and brain composition and results in an activation of the
synthesis of the brain neurotransmitter 5-hydroxytryptamine. These results
also demonstrate more activity of the rate-limiting enzyme tryptophan
hydroxylase in the malnourished fetal and postnatal brain. However, the
activity of this enzyme remains increased in the brain of nutritionally
recovered animals accompanied by an increase in the synthesis of
5-hydroxytryptamine. We therefore suggest that, in the nutritionally recovered
animal, the mechanism of activation of this biosynthetic path in the brain may
be not dependent on the increased **availability of free L-tryptophan observed
in malnourished animals, but might be due to a specific change in the enzyme
complex itself. This hypothesis is** supported by the fact that plasma free
and brain L-tryptophan return to normal in the recovered animal.

Brain Res 1997 Nov 7;774(1-2):265-8. **Tryptophan ingestion by gestant mothers
alters prolactin and luteinizing hormone release in the adult male
offspring.** Martin L, Rodriguez Diaz M, Santana-Herrera C, Milena A, Santana
C.

Rev Esp Fisiol 1984 Jun;40(2):213-9. **[Lipolytic effect of serotonin in
vitro].** [Article in Spanish] Martinez-Conde A, Mayor de la Torre P, Tamarit-
Torres J The lipolytic action of serotonin on isolated adipocytes from the
adipose tissue of rats has been studied. The adipocytes were incubated in
serotonin 10(-6) M. Changes both in concentration and composition of the free
intra and extracellular fatty acids as well as diacylglycerides through liquid
gas chromatography were evaluated at different intervals. A lower
concentration of **free fatty acids and diacylglycerides is produced during
the first minutes of incubation as well as a subsequent increase in the
concentration of both, which becomes greatest after 20-30 minutes. The
composition of both lipidic fractions** (FFA and DAG) into fatty acids at 5,
10, 20 and 30 minutes, is related to the composition of the triacylglycerides
(TAG), since during the esterification **process a decline in the DAG of
linoleic and palmitoleic acid is observed, both acids arranging themselves
preferably in the TAG 2 position. Whereas the inverse process occurs during
lipolysis; i.e. an increase in the proportion of the acids** in the 2
position. In the FFA fraction, a higher proportion of fatty acids,
preferential by arranged in positions 1 + 3 of the TAG's is observed.
Similarly a decrease is observed in the extracellular concentration of FFA in
the presence of serotonin with respect to the controls, a fact which has been
described by other authors. An analysis of the present data leads us to revise
the possible **role of "Cahill's cycle" (simultaneous activation of the DAG-
acyl-transferase and the HSL-TAG-lipase) in the action of serotonin and other
hormones.**

Nahrung 1991;35(9):961-7. **[The effect of different protein diets on
longevity and various biochemical parameters of aged rats].** Medovar BJa,
Petzke KJ, Semesko TG, Albrecht V, Grigorov JuG Institut fur Gerontologie,
AMW, UdSSR, Kiev. In this work 23 month old rats were fed for 200 days with
different protein diets (NT-diet: 19% protein, 72% of animal origin and LP-
diet: 8.8% protein exclusively of vegetable origin). Some metabolic parameters
and lifespan (on the base of a 50% death-rate) were determined. The relations
of the liver free amino **acids glycine + alanine and tyrosine + phenylalanine
+ branched chain amino acids and the ratio of phenylalanine/tyrosine were
determined to be higher in the LP-group.** Phenylalanine in liver and urea
concentrations in liver and serum were lower in the LP-group. Furthermore the
dopamine or serotonin levels were significantly lower in lateral and medial or
lateral regions of the hypothalamus respectively in LP-diet fed rats. The
norepinephrine content was not modified by **the diets. The median lifespan of
23 month old rats was higher by 24% following LP-treatment. These results
suggest that the protein component (amino acids) of** different diets may
modify metabolic parameters and lifespan of animals by mechanisms in which the
central regulation may be involved.

J Neurol Sci 1976 May;28(1):41-56. **Skeletal muscle necrosis following
membrane-active drugs plus serotonin.** Meltzer HY.

Brain Res Bull 1977 Sep-Oct;2(5):347-53. **Effects of developmental protein
malnutrition on tryptophan utilization in brain and peripheral tissues.**
Miller M, Leahy JP, McConville F, Morgane PJ, Resnick O.

Exp Neurol 1977 Oct;57(1):142-57. **Tryptophan availability: relation to
elevated brain serotonin in developmentally protein-malnourished rats.**
Miller M, Leahy JP, Stern WC, Morgane PJ, Resnick O.

Synapse 1990;6(4):338-43. **Age-related changes of strychnine-insensitive
glycine receptors in rat brain as studied by in vitro autoradiography**.
Miyoshi R, Kito S, Doudou N, Nomoto T. 3H-glycine binding sites were most
concentrated in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, and olfactory tubercle, and
moderate densities of binding sites were located in the striatum, nucleus
accumbens, amygdala, and certain thalamic nuclei. **In aged animals, severe
decline of 3H-glycine binding sites was observed in the telencephalic regions
including the hippocampus and cerebral cortex. These results suggest that
the decrease of glycine receptors in particular brain regions has some
relation with changes of neuronal functions associated with aging process in
these areas.** 

Enzyme 1976;21(6):481-7. **Inhibition of actomyosin ATPase by high
concentrations of 5-hydroxytryptamine. Possible basis of lesion in 5HT-induced
experimental myopathy.** Mothersill C, Heffron JJ, McLoughlin JV.

Brain Res 1975 Jul 25;93(1):123-32. **Regulation of 5-hydroxytryptamine
metabolism in mouse brain by adrenal glucocorticoids.** Neckers L, Sze PY A
single injection of **hydrocortisone acetate (HCA; 20 mg/kg, i.p.) accelerated
the accumulation of 5-HT in whole brain after inhibition of monoamine oxidase
activity by paragyline. The hormone did not appear to change brain tryptophan
hydroxylase or 5-hydroxytryptophan decarboxylase activity. However, tryptophan
levels in brain were elevated by 50% within 1 h after treatment with HCA.**

Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1967 Nov;126(2):579-83. **Serotonin antagonist increases
longevity in mice with hereditary muscular dystrophy.** O'Steen WK.

Mech Ageing Dev 1988 Apr;43(1):79-98. **Histology and survival in age-delayed
low-tryptophan-fed rats. Ooka H, Segall PE, Timiras PS.** Diets containing
tryptophan in concentrations 30 and 40 percent of those fed to controls from
weaning to 24-30 months or more, can delay aging in Long-Evans female rats.
Mortality among low-tryptophan-fed rats was greater in the juvenile period,
but substantially less than controls at late ages. Histological biomarkers of
aging were also delayed after tryptophan restriction in some organs (liver,
heart, uterus, ovary, adrenal and spleen) but not in others (kidney, lung,
aorta). Brain serotonin levels were low in tryptophan-deficient rats but
showed remarkable capacity for rehabilitation. Effects on early and late
mortality and brain levels of serotonin were proportional to the severity of
the restriction.

Age Ageing 1985 Mar;14(2):71-5. **Plasma tryptophan, age and depression.**
Phipps DA, Powell C. Plasma, obtained from 131 nondepressed, otherwise healthy
subjects aged from 17 to 102 years, and 22 depressed subjects aged over 70
years, was analysed for total and free tryptophan. Variation with age was
found in total tryptophan. **This association has not been described hitherto.
There was a significant increase in total tryptophan and a non-significant
increase in free tryptophan with depression. This is in contrast to some
studies in younger people showing a decline in plasma tryptophan in depressed
subjects.**

Bratisl Lek Listy 1975 Jul;64(1):58-63. **[The effect of serotonin on the
release of free fatty acids from human and rat adipose tissue (author's
transl)].** [Article in Czech] Rath R, Kujalova V.

Adv Exp Med Biol 1999;467:497-505. **Oxidative damage in rat tissue following
excessive L-tryptophan and atherogenic diets.** Ronen N, Livne E, Gross B.

FASEB J 1994 Dec;8(15):1302-7. **Methionine restriction increases blood
glutathione and longevity in F344 rats.** Richie JP Jr, Leutzinger Y,
Parthasarathy S, Malloy V, Orentreich N, Zimmerman JA Met restriction
resulted in a 42% increase in mean and 44% increase in maximum life span, and
in 43% lower body weight compared to controls (P < 0.001). Increases in blood
GSH levels of 81% and 164% were observed in mature and old Met-restricted
animals, respectively (P < 0.001).

Carcinogenesis 1999 Nov;20(11):2075-81. **Dietary glycine prevents the
development of liver tumors caused by the peroxisome proliferator WY-14,643.**
Rose ML, Cattley RC, Dunn C, Wong V, Li X, Thurman RG.

Mech Ageing Dev 1983 Nov-Dec; 23(3-4):245-52. **Low tryptophan diets delay
reproductive aging.** Segall PE, Timiras PS, Walton JR. Newly weaned female
rats fed diets severely deficient in the essential amino acid tryptophan show
marked delays in reproductive aging, with conception and delivery occurring as
late as 36 months. The rate of aging in these rats seems inversely related to
both their early growth rates and the accessibility of brain tryptophan. The
subsequent age retardation may depend on a reduction in both early cell loss
and rate of brain maturation.

Mech Ageing Dev 1978 Jan;7(1):1-17. **Neural and endocrine development after
chronic tryptophan deficiency in rats: I. Brain monoamine and pituitary
responses.** Segall PE, Ooka H, Rose K, Timiras PS. Caloric restriction and
tryptophan deficient diets have been shown to delay aging in the immature
laboratory rat. Another group of animals, in which growth and maturation was
delayed by feeding d,1-parachlorophenylalanine (PCPA) showed decreases in
serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine concentrations in all brain regions
investigated. All treatments employed to arrest growth and maturation resulted
in pituitary alterations manifested by gross, histological and ultrastructural
changes. It is postulated that there maturation- and age-retarding treatments
delay the development of the central nervous system resulting in postponed
maturation of the neuroendocrine axis, with consequent hypoactivity of certain
pituitary functions and a resultant delay in the onset of maturation and
senescence.

Aktuelle Gerontol 1977 Oct;7(10):535-8. **Long-term tryptophan restriction and
aging in the rat.** Segall P. Growth-retarded rats fed a tryptophan deficient
diet at 21 days for periods of **6-22 months were shown to reach normal body
weight when subsequently fed Purina Rat Chow. They demonstrated an increased
ability over similar aged controls to recover from hypothermia induced by
3-minute whole-body ice water immersion,** were able to bear litters at 17--28
months of age, showed a delay in the age of onset of visible tumors, and
indicated an increase in their average lifespan at **late ages. Animals fed on
this diet from 3 months of age revealed a similar ability to reproduce at
advanced ages, but not as marked as those placed on the diet earlier. The
average lifespan (in months +/- the standard error of the mean) of the rats
recovering from the long-term tryptophan-deficient diets was 36.31 +/- 2.26
while the control rats survived an average of 30.5 +/- 1.90** months. The last
of 8 rats surviving the period of tryptophan-deficiency died at **45.50 months
(1387 days) while the last of 14 control rats died at 41.75 months (1266
days). It is hypothesized that some kind of subtle mechanism exerts its**
influence on the rats during the period of tryptophan deficiency which caused
an accelerated morbidity and mortality as they approached senescence
approximately **1 to 2 years after refeeding.** This is parallel to the
situation with immature **animals subjected to long-term caloric restriction
and then fed on normal diets.**

Mech Ageing Dev 1976 Mar-Apr;5(2):109-24. **Patho-physiologic findings after
chronic tryptophan deficiency in rats: a model for delayed growth and aging.**
Segall PE, Timiras PS. Long-Evans female rats three weeks, three months and
13-14 months of age were placed on tryptophan-deficient diets for periods
ranging from a few months to nearly two years. Growth was interupted during
the period of tryptophan-deficiency, but when the animals were returned to a
complete diet, they gained weight and grew to normal size. Ability to
reproduce, as indicated **by litter production, was present at 17-28 months of
age in rats which had been deprived of tryptophan, whereas no controls over 17
months of age produced any offspring. Other signs of delayed aging in the
experimental group included, at advanced ages, greater longevity, as well as
later onset in the appearance of obvious tumors, and better coat condition and
hair regrowth. Many of these effects were also seen in pair-fed controls (fed
a diet equal in amount to that** eaten by the tryptophan-deprived rats, but
with 1-tryptophan added). It is hypothesized that tryptophan deficiency delays
growth, development and maturation of the central nervous system (CNS), in
particular, by decreasing the levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin, for
which tryptophan is the necessary precursor. In a parallel experiment, chronic
treatment with d, 1-parachlorophenylalanine, an inhibitor of brain serotonin
synthesis, from weaning until adulthood, also inhibited growth (body weight)
and delayed sexual maturation (age of vaginal opening). These observations
suggest that diets deficient in tryptophan or restricted in calories can
affect maturation and aging by interfering with CNS protein synthesis, or
neurotransmitter metabolism, or both.

Naturwissenschaften 1965 Sep;52(18):519. **[Serotonin-caused muscular
dystrophy].** [Article in German] Selye H.

Toxicology 1999 Feb 15;132(2-3):139-46. **Protection against chronic cadmium
toxicity by glycine.** Shaikh ZA, Tang W

Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 1998 Mar;62(3):580-3. **Increased conversion ratio
of tryptophan to niacin in severe food restriction.** Shibata K, Kondo T, Miki
A.

Monogr Neural Sci 1976;3:94-101. **Sex, migraine and serotonin
interrelationships.** Sicuteri F, Del Bene E, Fonda C. Sexual deficiency or
frank impotence in man could be due to an imbalance of monoamines,
particularly 5-HT, at the mating center level. An absolute or **relative
excess of 5-HT seems to antagonize testosterone at the level of the mating
center receptors in the brain. Plasma testosterone levels in so-called
psychological impotence are normal. When the 5-HT concentration in sexually
deficient men is sufficiently decreased with parachlorophenylalanine (PCPA)**
treatment and testosterone levels increased following its administration, a
vivid sexual stimulation appears in about half of the untractable cases. Yet
the PCPA-MAOI treatment avoids the prostate carcinogenic risk of testosterone
administration in aging males, and seems to have euphorizing effects stronger
than those expected only from MAOI therapy. Because of the several side
effects of PCPA-MAOI testosterone, the present experiments should be
interpreted very cautiously.

Hepatology 1999 Mar;29(3):737-45. **Glycine and uridine prevent
D-galactosamine hepatotoxicity in the rat: role of Kupffer cells.**
Stachlewitz RF, Seabra V, Bradford B, Bradham CA, Rusyn I, Germolec D, Thurman
RG.

Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1999 Mar;79(4):318-24. **Effect of acute and
chronic exercise on plasma amino acids and prolactin concentrations and on
[3H]ketanserin binding to serotonin2A receptors on human platelets.** Struder
HK, Hollmann W, Platen P, Wostmann R, Weicker H, Molderings GJ. **The
neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) has been shown to
modulate various physiological and psychological functions such as fatigue.**
Altered regulation of the serotonergic system has been suggested to play a
role in response to exercise stress. The present results support the
hypothesis that acute endurance exercise may increase 5-HT availability.
**This was reflected in the periphery by increased concentration of the 5-HT
precursor free TRP, by increased plasma PRL concentration, and by a reduction
of** 5-HT2A receptors on platelets.

Epilepsy Res 1999 Jan;33(1):11-21. **Pharmacokinetic analysis and
anticonvulsant activity of glycine and glycinamide derivatives.** Sussan S,
Dagan A, Bialer M.

Adv Biochem Psychopharmacol 1976; 15:251-65. **Glucocorticoid regulation of
the serotonergic system of the brain.** Sze PY. Glucorticoids at
concentrations above 10(-7) M stimulate the uptake of tryptophan by brain
synaptosomes.

Neurobiol Aging 1984 Fall;5(3):235-42. **Lifetime brain serotonin: regional
effects of age and precursor availability.** Timiras PS, Hudson DB, Segall PE.
**In the rat, regional brain serotonin levels which do not change from 2-30
months of age are increased at 36 months.** Impaired brain serotonin levels
recover moderately but remain lower than controls as late as 36 months, growth
is never completely compensated, and norepinephrine levels show a rebound
increase.

Kidney Int 1996 Feb;49(2):449-60. **Cytoprotection of kidney epithelial cells
by compounds that target amino acid gated chloride channels.** Venkatachalam
MA, Weinberg JM, Patel Y, Saikumar P, Dong Z

Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2000 Aug;279(2):L390-8 **. Dietary glycine
blunts lung inflammatory cell influx following acute endotoxin.** Wheeler MD,
Rose ML, Yamashima S, Enomoto N, Seabra V, Madren J, Thurman RG.

Am J Physiol 1999 Nov;277(5 Pt 1):L952-9. **Production of superoxide and TNF-
alpha from alveolar macrophages is blunted by glycine.** Wheeler MD, Thurman
RG.

Stroke 1991 Apr;22(4):469-76. **Identification of capric acid as a potent
vasorelaxant of human basilar arteries.** White RP, Ricca GF, el-Bauomy AM,
Robertson JT **To determine whether naturally occurring fatty acids,
especially saturated ones, might act directly as vasodilators, segments of
human basilar arteries and umbilical arteries were precontracted submaximally
with prostaglandin F2 alpha and then exposed to different saturated fatty
acids (C4 through C16) or** unsaturated fatty acids (C14:1, C18:1, C18:2, and
C18:3) at concentrations from 4 microM to 4 mM. The results showed caprate
(C10) to be the most potent vasorelaxant and basilar arteries to be more
responsive (EC50 = 63 microM) than umbilical arteries (EC50 = 780 microM).
**Caprate also inhibited contractions elicited by KCl, serotonin, and the
thromboxane analogue U46619.** 

Neurochem Res 1978 Jun;3(3):295-311. **Adaptive changes induced by high
altitude in the development of brain monoamine enzymes.** Vaccari A, Brotman
S, Cimino J, Timiras PS.

Growth Dev Aging 1991 Winter; 55(4):275-83. **Effect of aging and diet
restriction on monoamines and amino acids in cerebral cortex of Fischer-344
rats.** Yeung JM, Friedman E.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992 Jul 15;89(14):6443-6. **Platelet activation by
simultaneous actions of diacylglycerol and unsaturated fatty acids.** Yoshida
K, Asaoka Y, Nishizuka Y Several cis-unsaturated fatty acids such as oleic,
linoleic, linolenic, eicosapentaenoic, and docosahexaenoic acids added
directly to intact human platelets greatly enhance protein kinase C activation
as judged by the phosphorylation of its specific endogenous substrate, a
47-kDa protein. I **n the presence of ionomycin and either
1,2-dioctanoylglycerol or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, the release of
serotonin from the platelets is also remarkably increased by cis-unsaturated
fatty acids. The effect of these fatty acids is observed at concentrations
less than 50 microM. Saturated fatty acids and trans-unsaturated fatty acids
are inactive.** . . . cis-unsaturated fatty acids increase an apparent
sensitivity of the platelet response to Ca2+. The results suggest that cis-
unsaturated fatty acids, which are presumably produced from
phosphatidylcholine by signal-dependent activation of phospholipase A2, may
take part directly in cell signaling through the protein kinase C pathway.

Jpn J Physiol 1969 Apr 15;19(2):176-86. **Lipolytic action of serotonin in
brown adipose tissue in vitro.** Yoshimura K, Hiroshige T, Itoh S

Hepatology 2000 Sep;32(3):542-6. **Glycine prevents apoptosis of rat
sinusoidal endothelial cells caused by deprivation of vascular endothelial
growth factor.** Zhang Y, Ikejima K, Honda H, Kitamura T, Takei Y, Sato N

Mol Pharmacol 1999 Sep;56(3):455-63. **Dietary glycine and renal denervation
prevents cyclosporin A-induced hydroxyl radical production in rat kidney.**
Zhong Z, Connor HD, Yin M, Moss N, Mason RP, Bunzendahl H, Forman DT, Thurman
RG

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved.
[www.RayPeat.com](http://www.RayPeat.com)

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

