![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Unsaturated Vegetable Oils: Toxic**  

GLOSSARY:  

Immunodeficiency (weakness of the immune system) can take many forms. AIDS,
for example, refers to an immunodeficiency which is "acquired," rather than
"inborn." Radiation and vegetable oils can cause "acquired immunodeficiency."
Unsaturated oils, especially polyunsaturates, weaken the immune system's
function in ways that are similar to the damage caused by radiation, hormone
imbalance, cancer, aging, or viral infections. The media discuss sexually
transmitted and drug-induced immunodeficiency, but it isn't yet considered
polite to discuss vegetable oil-induced immunodeficiency.

Unsaturated oils: When an oil is saturated, that means that the molecule has
all the hydrogen atoms it can hold. Unsaturation means that some hydrogen
atoms have been removed, and this opens the structure of the molecule in a way
that makes it susceptible to attack by free radicals.  

Free radicals are reactive molecular fragments that occur even in healthy
cells, and can damage the cell. When unsaturated oils are exposed to free
radicals they can create chain reactions of free radicals that spread the
damage in the cell, and contribute to the cell's aging.  

Rancidity of oils occurs when they are exposed to oxygen, in the body just as
in the bottle. Harmful free radicals are formed, and oxygen is used up.  

Essential fatty acids (EFA) are, according to the textbooks, linoleic acid and
linolenic acid, and they are supposed to have the status of "vitamins," which
must be taken in the diet to make life possible. However, we are able to
synthesize our own unsaturated fats when we don't eat the "EFA," so they are
not "essential." The term thus appears to be a misnomer. [M. E. Hanke,
"Biochemistry," Encycl. Brit. Book of the Year, 1948.]  

Q: You say vegetable oils are hazardous to your health. What vegetable oils
are you talking about?  

Mainly, I'm referring to soybean oil, corn oil, safflower oil, canola, sesame
oil, sunflower seed oil, palm oil, and any others that are labeled as
"unsaturated" or "polyunsaturated." Almond oil, which is used in many
cosmetics, is very unsaturated.  

Chemically, the material that makes these oils very toxic is the
polyunsaturated fat itself. These unsaturated oils are found in very high
concentrations in many seeds, and in the fats of animals that have eaten a
diet containing them. The fresh oils, whether cold pressed or consumed as part
of the living plant material, are intrinsically toxic, and it is not any
special industrial treatment that makes them toxic. Since these oils occur in
other parts of plants at lower concentration, and in the animals which eat the
plants, it is impossible to eat a diet which lacks them, unless special foods
are prepared in the laboratory.  

These toxic oils are sometimes called the "essential fatty acids" or "vitamin
F," but this concept of the oils as essential nutrients was clearly disproved
over 50 years ago.  

Linoleic and linolenic acids, the "essential fatty acids," and other
polyunsaturated fatty acids, which are now fed to pigs to fatten them, in the
form of corn and soy beans, cause the animals' fat to be chemically equivalent
to vegetable oil. In the late 1940s, chemical toxins were used to suppress the
thyroid function of pigs, to make them get fatter while consuming less food.
When that was found to be carcinogenic, it was then found that corn and soy
beans had the same antithyroid effect, causing the animals to be fattened at
low cost. The animals' fat becomes chemically similar to the fats in their
food, causing it to be equally toxic, and equally fattening.  

These oils are derived from seeds, but their abundance in some meat has led to
a lot of confusion about "animal fats." Many researchers still refer to lard
as a "saturated fat," but this is simply incorrect when pigs are fed soybeans
and corn.  

Q: How are these oils hazardous to your health?  

Ultimately, all systems of the body are harmed by an excess of these oils.
There are two reasons for this. One is that the plants produce the oils for
protection, not only to store energy for the germination of the seed. To
defend the seeds from the animals that would eat them, the oils block the
digestive enzymes in the animals' stomachs. Digestion is one of our most basic
functions, and evolution has built many other systems by using variations of
that system; as a result, all of these systems are damaged by the substances
which damage the digestive system.  

The other reason is that the seeds are designed to germinate in early spring,
so their energy stores must be accessible when the temperatures are cool, and
they normally don't have to remain viable through the hot summer months.
Unsaturated oils are liquid when they are cold, and this is necessary for any
organism that lives at low temperatures. For example, fish in cold water would
be stiff if they contained saturated fats. These oils easily get rancid
(spontaneously oxidizing) when they are warm and exposed to oxygen. Seeds
contain a small amount of vitamin E to delay rancidity. When the oils are
stored in our tissues, they are much warmer, and more directly exposed to
oxygen, than they would be in the seeds, and so their tendency to oxidize is
very great. These oxidative processes can damage enzymes and other parts of
cells, and especially their ability to produce energy.  

The enzymes which break down proteins are inhibited by unsaturated fats, and
these enzymes are needed not only for digestion, but also for production of
thyroid hormones, clot removal, immunity, and the general adaptability of
cells. The risks of abnormal blood clotting, inflammation, immune deficiency,
shock, aging, obesity, and cancer are increased. Thyroid and progesterone are
decreased. Since the unsaturated oils block protein digestion in the stomach,
we can be malnourished even while "eating well."  

Plants produce many protective substances to repel or injure insects and other
animals that eat them. They produce their own pesticides. The oils in seeds
have this function. On top of this natural toxicity, the plants are sprayed
with industrial pesticides, which can concentrate in the seed oils.  

It isn't the quantity of these polyunsaturated oils which governs the harm
they do, but the relationship between them and the saturated fats. Obesity,
free radical production, the formation of age pigment, blood clotting,
inflammation, immunity, and energy production are all responsive to the ratio
of unsaturated fats to saturated fats, and the higher this ratio is, the
greater the probability of harm there is.  

There are interesting interactions between these oils and estrogen. For
example, puberty occurs at an earlier age if estrogen is high, or if these
oils are more abundant in the diet. This is probably a factor in the
development of cancer.  

All systems of the body are harmed by an excess of these oils. There are three
main kinds of damage: one, hormonal imbalances, two, damage to the immune
system, and three, oxidative damage.  

Q: How do they cause hormonal imbalances?  

There are many changes in hormones caused by unsaturated fats. Their best
understood effect is their interference with the function of the thyroid
gland. Unsaturated oils block thyroid hormone secretion, its movement in the
circulatory system, and the response of tissues to the hormone. When the
thyroid hormone is deficient, the body is generally exposed to increased
levels of estrogen. The thyroid hormone is essential for making the
"protective hormones" progesterone and pregnenolone, so these hormones are
lowered when anything interferes with the function of the thyroid. The thyroid
hormone is required for using and eliminating cholesterol, so cholesterol is
likely to be raised by anything which blocks the thyroid function. [B. Barnes
and L. Galton, Hypothyroidism, 1976, and 1994 references.]  

Q: How do they damage the immune system?  

Vegetable oil is recognized as a drug for knocking out the immune system.
Vegetable oil emulsions were used to nourish cancer patients, but it was
discovered that the unsaturated oils were suppressing their immune systems.
The same products, in which vegetable oil is emulsified with water for
intravenous injection, are now marketed specifically for the purpose of
suppressing immunity in patients who have had organ transplants. Using the
oils in foods has the same harmful effect on the immune system. [E. A.
Mascioli, et al.,Lipids 22(6) 421, 1987.] Unsaturated fats directly kill white
blood cells. [C. J. Meade and J. Martin, Adv. Lipid Res., 127, 1978.]  

Q: How do they cause oxidative damage?  

Unsaturated oils get rancid when exposed to air; that is called oxidation, and
it is the same process that occurs when oil paint "dries." Free radicals are
produced in the process.

This process is accelerated at higher temperatures. The free radicals produced
in this process react with parts of cells, such as molecules of DNA and
protein and may become attached to those molecules, causing abnormalities of
structure and function.  

Q: What if I eat only organically grown vegetable oils?  

Even without the addition of agricultural chemicals, an excess of unsaturated
vegetable oils damages the human body. Cancer can't occur, unless there are
unsaturated oils in the diet. [C. Ip, et al., Cancer Res. 45, 1985.] Alcoholic
cirrhosis of the liver cannot occur unless there are unsaturated oils in the
diet. [Nanji and French, Life Sciences. 44, 1989.] Heart disease can be
produced by unsaturated oils, and prevented by adding saturated oils to the
diet. [J. K. G. Kramer, et al., Lipids 17, 372, 1983.]  

Q. What oils are safe?  

Coconut and olive oil are the only vegetable oils that are really safe, but
butter and lamb fat, which are highly saturated, are generally very safe
(except when the animals have been poisoned). Coconut oil is unique in its
ability to prevent weight-gain or cure obesity, by stimulating metabolism. It
is quickly metabolized, and functions in some ways as an antioxidant. Olive
oil, though it is somewhat fattening, is less fattening than corn or soy oil,
and contains an

antioxidant which makes it protective against heart disease and cancer.  

Israel had the world's highest incidence of breast cancer when they allowed
the insecticide lindane to be used in dairies, and the cancer rate decreased
immediately after the government prohibited its use. The United States has
fairly good laws to control the use of cancer-causing agents in the food
supply, but they are not vigorously enforced. Certain cancers are several
times more common among corn farmers than among other farmers, presumably
because corn "requires" the use of more pesticides. This probably makes corn
oil's toxicity greater than it would be otherwise, but even the pure,
organically grown material is toxic, because of its intrinsic unsaturation.  

In the United States, lard is toxic because the pigs are fed large quantities
of corn and soy beans. Besides the intrinsic toxicity of the seed oils, they
are contaminated with agricultural chemicals. Corn farmers have a very high
incidence of cancer, presumably because of the pesticides they use on their
crop.  

Q: But aren't "tropical oils" bad for us?  

In general, tropical oils are much more healthful than oils produced in a cold
climate. This is because tropical plants live at a temperature that is close
to our natural body temperature. Tropical oils are stable at high
temperatures. When we eat tropical oils, they don't get rancid in our tissues
as the cold-climate seed oils, such as corn oil, safflower oil and soy oil,
do. [R.B. Wolf, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 59, 230, 1982; R. Wolfe, Chem 121, Univ.
of Oregon, 1986.]  

When added to a balanced diet, coconut oil slightly lowers the cholesterol
level, which is exactly what is expected when a dietary change raises thyroid
function. This same increase in thyroid function and metabolic rate explains
why people and animals that regularly eat coconut oil are lean, and remarkably
free of heart disease and cancer.  

Although I don't recommend "palm oil" as a food, because I think it is less
stable than coconut oil, some studies show that it contains valuable
nutrients. For example, it contains antioxidants similar to vitamin E, which
lowers both LDL cholesterol and a platelet clotting factor. [B. A. Bradlow,
University of Illinois, Chicago; Science News 139, 268, 1991.] Coconut oil and
other tropical oils also contain some hormones that are related to
pregnenolone or progesterone.  

Q: Isn't coconut oil fattening?  

Coconut oil is the least fattening of all the oils. Pig farmers tried to use
it to fatten their animals, but when it was added to the animal feed, coconut
oil made the pigs lean [See Encycl. Brit. Book of the Year, 1946].  

Q: What about olive oil? Isn't it more fattening than other vegetable oils?  

In this case, as with coconut oil, "fattening" has more to do with your
ability to burn calories than with the caloric value of the oil. Olive oil has
a few more calories per quart than corn or soy oil, but since it doesn't
damage our ability to burn calories as much as the unsaturated oils do, it is
less fattening. Extra virgin olive oil is the best grade, and contains an
antioxidant that protects against cancer and heart disease. [1994, Curr.
Conts.]  

Q: Is "light" olive oil okay?  

No. Now and then someone learns how to make a profit from waste material.
"Knotty pine" boards were changed from a discarded material to a valued
decorative material by a little marketing skill. Light olive oil is a low
grade material which sometimes has a rancid smell and probably shouldn't be
used as food.  

Q: Is margarine okay?  

There are several problems with margarine. The manufacturing process
introduces some toxins, including a unique type of fat which has been
associated with heart disease. [Sci. News, 1974; 1991.] There are likely to be
dyes and preservatives added to margarine. And newer products contain new
chemicals that haven't been in use long enough to know whether they are safe.  

However, the basic hardening process, hydrogenation of the oils, has been
found to make the oils less likely to cause cancer. If I had to choose between
eating ordinary corn oil or corn oil that was 100% saturated, to make a hard
margarine, I would choose the hard margarine, because it resists oxidation,
isn't suppressive to the thyroid gland, and doesn't cause cancer.  

Q: What about butter?  

Butter contains natural vitamin A and D and some beneficial natural hormones.
It is less fattening than the unsaturated oils. There is much less cholesterol
in an ounce of butter than in a lean chicken breast [about 1/5 as much
cholesterol in fat as in lean meat on a calorie basis, according to R. Reiser
of Texas A & M Univ., 1979.].  

Q: Are fish oils good for you?  

Some of the unsaturated fats in fish are definitely less toxic than those in
corn oil or soy oil, but that doesn't mean they are safe. Fifty years ago, it
was found that a large amount of cod liver oil in dogs' diet increased their
death rate from cancer by 20 times, from the usual 5% to 100%. A diet rich in
fish oil causes intense production of toxic lipid peroxides, and has been
observed to reduce a man's sperm count to zero. [H. Sinclair, Prog. Lipid Res.
25, 667, 1989.]  

Q: What about lard?  

In this country, lard is toxic beause the pigs are fed large quantities of
corn and soy beans. Besides the natural toxicity of the seed oils, the oils
are contaminated with agricultural chemicals. Corn farmers have a very high
incidence of cancer, presumably because corn "requires" the use of more
pesticides. This probably makes corn oil's toxicity greater than it would be
otherwise. but even the pure, organically grown material is toxic, because of
its unsaturation.

Women with breast cancer have very high levels of agricultural pesticides in
their breasts [See Science News, 1992, 1994].  

Israel had the world's highest incidence of breast cancer when they allowed
the insecticide lindane to be used in dairies, and the cancer rate decreased
immediately after the government prohibited its use. The United States has
fairly good laws to control the use of cancer-causing agents in the food
supply, but they are not vigorously enforced. [World Incid. of Cancer, 1992]  

Q: I have no control over oils when eating out. What can I do to offset the
harmful effects of polyunsaturated oils?  

A small amount of these oils won't kill you. It is the proportion of them in
your diet that matters. A little extra vitamin E (such as 100 units per day)
will take care of an occasional American restaurant meal. Based on animal
studies, it would take a teaspoonful per day of corn or soy oil added to a
fat-free diet to significantly increase our risk of cancer. Unfortunately, it
is impossible to devise a fat-free diet outside of a laboratory. Vegetables,
grains, nuts, fish and meats all naturally contain large amounts of these
oils, and the extra oil used in cooking becomes a more serious problem.  

Q Why are the unsaturated oils so popular if they are dangerous?  

It's a whole system of promotion, advertising, and profitability.  

50 years ago, paints and varnishes were made of soy oil, safflower oil, and
linseed (flax seed) oil. Then chemists learned how to make paint from
petroleum, which was much cheaper. As a result, the huge seed oil industry
found its crop increasingly hard to sell. Around the same time, farmers were
experimenting with poisons to make their pigs get fatter with less food, and
they discovered that corn and soy beans served the purpose, in a legal way.
The crops that had been grown for the paint industry came to be used for
animal food. Then these foods that made animals get fat cheaply came to be
promoted as foods for humans, but they had to direct attention away from the
fact that they are very fattening. The "cholesterol" focus was just one of the
marketing tools used by the oil industry. Unfortunately it is the one that has
lasted the longest, even after the unsaturated oils were proven to cause heart
disease as well as cancer. [Study at L.A. Veterans Hospital, 1971.]  

I use some of these oils (walnut oil is very nice, but safflower oil is
cheaper) for oil painting, but I am careful to wash my hands thoroughly after
I touch them, because they can be absorbed through the skin.  
  

**SUMMARY**

Unsaturated fats cause aging, clotting, inflammation, cancer, and weight gain.  

Avoid foods which contain the polyunsaturated oils, such as corn, soy,
safflower, flax, cottonseed, canola, peanut, and sesame oil.  

Mayonnaise, pastries, even candies may contain these oils; check the labels
for ingredients.  

Pork is now fed corn and soy beans, so lard is usually as toxic as those oils;
use only lean pork.  

Fish oils are usually highly unsaturated; "dry" types of fish, and shellfish,
used once or twice a week, are good. Avoid cod liver oil.  

Use vitamin E.  

Use coconut oil, butter, and olive oil.  

Unsaturated fats intensify estrogen's harmful effects.  
  

REFERENCES  

1\. C. F. Aylsworth, C. W. Welsch, J. J. Kabora, J. E. Trosko, "Effect of
fatty acids on junctional communication: Possible role in tumor promotion by
dietary fat," Lipids 22(6), 445-54, 1987.  

2\. J. M. Bell and P. K. Lundberg, "Effects of a commercial soy lecithin
preparation on development of sensorimotor behavior & brain biochemicals in
the rat," Dev. Psychobiol. 8(1), 59-66, 1985.  

3\. R. S. Britton and B. R. Bacon, "Role of free radicals in liver diseases
and hepatic fibrosis," Hepatogastroenterology 41(4), 343-348, 1994.  

4\. M. S. Brown, et al., "Receptor mediated uptake of lipoprotein-cholesterol
and its utilization for steroid synthesis," Recent Progress in Hormone Res.
35, 315-257, 1979.  

5\. P. A. Cerutti, "Oxy-radicals and cancer," Lancet 455(8926), 862-863, 1994.  

6\. I. Davies and A. P. Fotheringham, "Lipofuscin--Does it affect cellular
performance?" Exp. Gerontol. 16, 119-125, 1981.  

7\. K. L. Erickson, et al., "Dietary lipid modulation of immune
responsiveness," Lipids 18, 468-74, 1983.  

8\. V. A. Folcik and M. K. Cathcart, "Predominance of esterified hydroperoxy-
linoleic acid in human monocyte-oxidized LDL," J. Lipid Res. 35(9), 1570-1582,
1994.  

9\. Fuller, C. J. and I. Jialal, "Effects of antioxidants and fatty acids on
low-density-lipoprotein oxidation," Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 60(6 Suppl.),
S1010-S1013, 1994.  

10\. M. C. Galli, et al., "Peroxidation potential of rat thymus during
development and involution," Comp. Biochem. Physiol (C) 107(3), 435-440, 1994.  

11\. J. M. Gaziano, et al., "Supplementation with beta-carotene in vivo and in
vitro does not inhibit low density lipoprotein oxidation," Atherosclerosis
112(2), 187-195, 1995.  

12\. M. B. Grisham, "Oxidants and free radicals in inflammatory bowel
disease," Lancet 344(8926), 859-861, 1994.  

13\. J. M. C. Gutteridge, "Antioxidants, nutritional supplements and life-
threaening diseases," Brit. J. Biomed. Sci. 51(3), 288-295, 1994.  

14\. D. Harman, et al., "Free radical theory of aging: effect of dietary fat
on central nervous system function," J. American Geriatrics Soc. 24(1),
292-98, 1976.  

15\. W. S. Hartroft and E. A. Porta, "Ceroid pigments," chapter VIII in
Present Knowledge in Nutrition, 3rd Edition, Nutrition Foundation, N.Y., 1967.  

16\. H. J. Helbock, et al., (Univ. of Calif. Berkeley) January, 1993
Pediatrics; in Science News 143, 78, 1993\. "Toxic 'fats' in preemie
supplement."  

H. R. Hirsch, "The waste-product theory of aging: Cell division rate as a
function of waste volume," Mech. Ageing Dev. 36, 95-107, 1986.  

17\. S. G. Imre, et al., "Increased proportion of docosahexanoic acid and high
lipid peroxidation capacity in erythrocytes of stroke patients," Stroke
25(12), 2416-2420, 1994.  

18\. Clement Ip, et al., "Requirement of essential fatty acids for mammary
tumorigenesis," Cancer Res. 45(5), 1997-2001, 1985.  

19\. P. V. Johnston, "Dietary fat, eicosanoids, and immunity," Adv. in Lipid
Res. 21, 103-41, 1985.  

20\. S. Kasayna, et al., "Unsaturated fatty acids are required for continuous
proliferation of transformed androgen-dependent cells by fibroblast growth
factor family proteins," Cancer Research 54(24), 6441-6445, 1994.  

21\. H. A. Kleinveld, et al., "Vitamin E and fatty acid intervention does not
attenuate the progression of atherosclerosis in watanabe heritable
hyperlipidemic rabbits," Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 15(2), 290-297,
1995.  

22\. J. K. G. Kramer, et al., Lipids 17, 372, 1983.  

23\. I. A. Kudryavtsev, et al., "Character of the modifying action of
polyunsaturated fatty acids on growth of transplantable tumors of various
types," Bull. Exp. Biol & Med. 105(4), 567-70, 1986.  

24\. R. D. Lynch, "Utilization of polyunsaturated fatty acids by human diploid
cells aging in vitro," Lipids 15(6), 412-20, 1967.  

25\. M. Martinez and A. Ballabriga, "Effects of parenteral nutrition with high
doses of linoleate on the developing human liver and brain," Lipids 22(3),
133-8, 1987.  

26\. R. S. Mehta, et al., "High fish oil diet increases oxidative stress
potential in mammary gland of spontaneously hypertensive rats," Clin. Exp.
Pharmacol. Physiol. 21(11), 881-889, 1994.  

27\. A. A. Nanji and S. W. French, "Dietary linoleic acid is required for
development of experimentally induced alcoholic liver-injury," Life Sciences
44, 223-7, 1989.  

28\. J. A. Lindsay, et al., "Fatty acid metabolism and cell proliferation,"
Lipids 18, 566-9, 1983.  

29\. M. L. Pearce and S. Dayton, "Incidence of cancer in men on a diet high in
polyunsaturated fat," Lancet 1, 464-467, 1971.  

30\. Pryor, W. A., "Free radicals and lipid proxidation--what they are and how
they got that way," Natural Antioxidants in Human, pp. 1-24, 1994.  

31\. P. Purasiri, et al., "Modulation of cytokine production in vivo by
dietary essential fatty acids in patients with colorectal cancer," Clin. Sci.
87(6), 711-717, 1994.  

32\. S. Rapoport and T. Schewe, "Endogenous inhibitors of the respiratory
chain," Trends in Biochemical Sci., Aug., 1977, 186-189.  

33\. H. Selye, "Sensitization by corn oil for the production of cardiac
necrosis...," Amer. J. of Cardiology 23, 719-22, 1969.  

34\. D. A. Street, et al., "Serum antioxidants and myocardial infarction--Are
low levels of carotenoids and alpha-tocopherol risk factors for myocardial
infarction?" Circulation 90(3), 1154-1161, 1994.  

35\. M. Takei, et al., "Inhibitory effects of calcium antagonists on
mitochondrial swelling induced by lipid peroxidation or arachidonic acid in
the rat brain in vitro," Neurochem. Res. 29(9), 1199-1206, 1994.  

36\. J. P. Thomas, et al., "Involvement of preexisting lipid hydroperoxides in
Cu2+-stimulated oxidation of low-density lipoprotein," Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
315(2), 244-254, 1994.  

37\. C. W. Welsch, "Review of the effects of dietary fat on experimental
mammary gland tumorigenesis: Role of lipid peroxidation," Free Radical Biol.
Med. 18(4), 757-773, 1995.  
  

**Essential Fatty Acids ("EFA"): A Technical Point**  

Those fatty acids, such as linoleic acid and linolenic acid, which are found
in linseed oil, soy oil, walnut oil, almond oil, corn oil, etc., are essential
for the spontaneous development of cancer, and also appear to be decisive
factors in the development of age pigment, alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver,
diabetes, obesity, stress-induced immunodeficiency, some aspects of the shock
reaction, epilepsy, brain swelling, congenital retardation, hardening of the
arteries, cataracts, and other degenerative conditions. They are possibly the
most important toxin for animals.  

The suppression of an enzyme system is characteristic of toxins. The "EFA"
powerfully, almost absolutely, inhibit the enzyme systems--desaturases and
elongases--which make our native unsaturated fatty acids.  

After weaning, these native fats gradually disappear from the tissues and are
replaced by the EFA and their derivatives. The age-related decline in our
ability to use oxygen and to produce energy corresponds closely to the
substitution of linoleic acid for the endogenous fats, in cardiolipin, which
regulates the crucial respiratory enzyme, cytochrome oxidase.  

Although the fish oils are less effective inhibitors of the enzymes, they are
generally similar to the seed oils in their ability to promote cancer, age-
pigment formation, free radical damage, etc. Their only special nutritional
value seems to be their vitamin A and vitamin D content. Since vitamin A is
important in the development of the eye, it is interesting that claims are
being made for the essentiality of some of the fatty acid components of fish
oil, in relation to the development of the eye.  

The polyunsaturated oils from seeds are recommended for use in paints and
varnishes, but skin contact with these substances should be avoided.  

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

