![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Vegetables, etc.Who Defines Food?**  
_

Since bacteria in the rumens of cows destroy unsaturated fatty acids, but
don't harm vitamin E, it seems reasonable to suppose that beef and milk would
have a better ratio of vitamin E to unsaturated fats than do the plants eaten
by the cows.  

Toxic pesticides are found in higher concentrations in the urine and fat of
slaughtered animals than in their livers, since the livers are detoxifying the
chemicals and causing them to be excreted. Presumably, the animals' livers
will perform the same detoxification reactions with the **phytotoxicants that
occur naturally in their diet.**

_

* * *

Not long ago, breast feeding was socially unacceptable in the United States,
and several manufacturers were teaching the worlds poorest women to use their
baby-food formulas even when there was no clean water for its preparation.
Industrialists have campaigned to convince the public that their by-products,
from cotton-seed oil to shrimp shells, are health foods. In several parts of
the world, desperately poor people sometimes eat clay, and even clay has been
promoted as a health food. Almost anything becomes food, when people are
under economic and social pressure. If these things arent acutely toxic, they
can become part of our normal diet.

Our instincts give us a few clues about our nutritional needs, such as thirst,
the hunger for salt, the pleasantness of sweet things, and the unpleasantness
of certain odors or very acrid or bitter tastes. People who are
constitutionally unable to taste certain bitter chemicals find certain
vegetables less objectionable; their instinctive guidance has become less
clear. But within the boundaries of cravings and disgust, habits and customs
become the dominant forces in diet. "Professional dietitians" and other
"experts" primarily function as enforcers of cultural prejudice.

The manufacturers of pureed vegetables for babies used to put large amounts of
salt, sugar, and monosodium glutamate into their products, because the added
chemicals served as instinctual signals that made the material somewhat
acceptable to the babies. There was no scientific basis for providing these
vegetables to babies in a form that they would accept, but it was a profitable
practice that was compatible with the social pressure against prolonged breast
feeding.

Poor people, especially in the spring when other foods were scarce, have
sometimes subsisted on foliage such as collard and poke greens, usually made
more palatable by cooking them with flavorings, such as a little bacon grease
and lots of salt. Eventually, "famine foods" can be accepted as dietary
staples. The fact that cows, sheep, goats and deer can thrive on a diet of
foliage shows that leaves contain essential nutrients. Their minerals,
vitamins, and amino acids are suitable for sustaining most animal life, if a
sufficient quantity is eaten. But when people try to live primarily on
foliage, as in famines, they soon suffer from a great variety of diseases.
Various leaves contain antimetabolic substances that prevent the assimilation
of the nutrients, and only very specifically adapted digestive systems (or
technologies) can overcome those toxic effects.

Some plants have specific pests, such as insects, that have adapted to be
resistant to that plants toxins, but if the plant and its predator are to
survive, there has to be a balance between the plant tissues digestibility
and its toxicity. Injury of a plant stimulates it to make increased amounts of
its defensive chemicals. Plant toxins are known to be specific for animal
tissues; for example, a toxin will inhibit the action of an enzyme from an
animal, but a plant enzyme that catalyzes the same reaction wont be affected.

Plant defensive chemicals can have beneficial uses as drugs. Plants are
important sources for chemicals used in chemotherapy of cancer, with the
purpose of stopping cell division. Other plant drugs can stimulate cell
division. The drug from one plant will sometimes protect cells against the
toxic effects of another plant. The use of any drug that isnt a natural part
of animal physiology will have many biological effects, so that a beneficial
drug action will usually be accompanied by unwanted side-effects. An
antioxidant may turn out to disrupt the endocrine system, an antiinflammatory
drug may be mutagenic or carcinogenic.

A particular plant will have a variety of defensive chemicals, with specific
functions. Underground, the plants roots and tubers are susceptible to attack
by fungi and nematodes. The leaves, stems, and seeds are susceptible to attack
by insects, birds, and grazing animals. Since the plants seeds are of unique
importance to the plant, and contain a high concentration of nutrients, they
must have special protection. Sometimes this consists of a hard shell, and
sometimes of chemicals that inhibit the animals digestive enzymes. Many
plants have evolved fruits that provide concentrated food for animals, and
that serve to distribute the seeds widely, as when a bird eats a berry, and
excretes the undigested seed at a great distance. If the fruit were poisonous,
it wouldnt serve the plants purpose so well. In general, the plants most
intense toxins are in its seeds, and the fruits, when mature, generally
contain practically no toxins. Roots contain chemicals that inhibit
microorganisms, but because they arent easily accessible by grazing animals
and insects, they dont contain the digestive inhibitors that are more
concentrated in the above-ground organs of the plant.

The toxins of plants include phenols, tannins, lectins/agglutinins, and
trypsin-inhibitors, besides innumerable more specific metabolic inhibitors,
including anti-vitamins. Unsaturated fats themselves are important defenses,
since they inhibit trypsin and other proteolytic enzymes, preventing the
assimilation of the proteins that are present in seeds and leaves, and
disrupting all biological processes that depend on protein breakdown, such as
the formation of thyroid hormone and the removal of blood clots.

Generally, fruits, roots, and tubers provide a high concentration of nutrients
along with low concentrations of toxic antimetabolic substances.

While nutritional reference tables often show fruits and potatoes as having
about 2% protein content, while nuts, grains, and legumes are shown with a
high protein content, often in the range of 15% to 40%, they neglect to point
out that fruits and potatoes have a very high water content, while that of the
seeds is extremely low. The protein content of milk is about 3%, which
according to the charts would suggest that it is inferior to beans and grains.
In fact, the protein value of grain is negligible, mainly because seeds
contain their protein in a storage form, that is extremely rich in nitrogen,
but poor in essential amino acids. Special preparation is needed to reduce the
toxicity of seeds, and in the case of beans, these methods are never very
satisfactory.

Besides their specific defensive toxins and antimetabolites, plants are major
sources of allergens. The allergenicity of a food depends on the sensitivity
of the individual, as well as on the growth conditions of the plant. The use
of extremely toxic pesticides has affected both the crops and the sensitivity
of the human population to allergens. Sensitivities induced originally by
toxic pesticides used on certain crops can probably persist after the
industrial chemical has been eliminated, because the immune system is
susceptible to conditioning.

Many types of phytochemicals are mutagenic, and some of those are
carcinogenic. Bruce Ames, at the University of California, devised a method of
screening for mutagens, using bacteria. One of his graduate students using the
technique found that the flame retardants in children's pajamas and bedding
were powerful mutagens, and were probably causing cancer. That event made Ames
a celebrity, and in the 1980s he went on a lecture tour supported by the
American Cancer Society. His lectures reflected the doctrine of the A.C.S.,
that industrial chemicals aren't responsible for cancer, but that individual
actions, such as smoking or dietary choices, are the main causes of cancer. He
used a fraudulently "age adjusted" graph of cancer mortality, that falsely
showed that mortality from all types of cancer except lung cancer had leveled
off after the A.C.S. came into existence. He described tests in which he had
compared DDT to extracts of food herbs, and found DDT to be less mutagenic
than several of the most commonly used flavoring herbs. His message, which was
eagerly received by his audience of chemistry and biology professors, was that
we should not worry about environmental pollution, because it's not as harmful
as the things that we do to ourselves. He said that if everyone would eat more
unsaturated vegetable oil, and didn't smoke, they wouldn't have anything to
worry about.

For me, the significance of his experiment was that plants contain natural
pesticides that should be taken more seriously, without taking industrial
toxins less seriously.

Technologies have been invented to convert vegetation into digestible protein,
but at our present scientific and technological level, its better to simply
minimize our use of the more toxic foods, and to direct more effort toward the
elimination of the conditions that produce famine.

Animal proteins, and fruits, because they contain the lowest levels of toxins,
should form the basis of the diet. Not all fruits, of course, are perfectly
safe--avocados, for example, contain so much unsaturated fat that they can be
carcinogenic and hepatotoxic.

Protein deficiency itself contributes to the harm done by toxins, since the
livers ability to detoxify them depends on adequate nutrition, especially
good protein. In the 1940s, Biskinds experiments showed that protein
deficiency leads to the accumulation of estrogen, because the liver normally
inactivates all the estrogen in the blood as it passes through the liver. This
applies to phytoestrogens and industrial estrogens as well as to the natural
estrogens of the body. At a certain point, the increased estrogen and
decreased thyroid and progesterone cause infertility, but before that point is
reached, the hyperestrogenism causes a great variety of birth defects.
Deformities of the male genitals, and later, testicular cancer in the sons and
breast cancer in the daughters, are produced by the combination of toxins and
nutritional deficiencies.  

REFERENCES

Onderstepoort J Vet Res 1989 Jun;56(2):145-6. **Thiaminase activities and
thiamine content of Pteridium aquilinum, Equisetum ramosissimum, Malva
parviflora, Pennisetum clandestinum and Medicago sativa.** Meyer P Animal and
Dairy Science Research Institute, Private Bag, Irene. Thiaminase type 1 and 2
activities and thiamine content of five plants were determined. Of these
Pteridium aquilinum and Equisetum ramosissimum were found to have considerably
more thiaminase activity and lower thiamine content than Malva parviflora,
Pennisetum clandestinum and Medicago sativa.

Nature 1994 Apr 21;368(6473):683-4. **Mystery of the poisoned expedition.**
Earl JW, McCleary BV Department of Biochemistry, Royal Alexandra Hospital for
Children, Camperdown, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. The Burke and Wills
expedition through the interior of Australia in the nineteenth century ended
in calamity. But the cause of death was more pernicious than anyone at the
time had imagined: beriberi due to thiaminase poisoning.

Comment in: Nature 1994 Aug 11; 370(6489):408. Aust Vet J 1992
Jul;69(7):165-7. **Mechanisms underlying Phalaris aquatica "sudden death"
syndrome in sheep.** Bourke CA, Carrigan MJ New South Wales Agriculture,
Agricultural Research and Veterinary Centre, Orange. Twenty outbreaks of
Phalaris aquatica "sudden death" syndrome in sheep were investigated between
1981 and 1991. Four were confirmed and one was suspected, to be a cardiac
disorder; 5 were confirmed and 3 were suspected, to be a polioencephalomalacic
disorder; the aetiology of the remaining 7 outbreaks could not be determined.
Potentially toxic levels of hydrocyanic acid (20 to 36 mg/100 g) were measured
in the 3 toxic phalaris pastures tested. The measurement of potentially toxic
levels of nitrate nitrogen (2920 micrograms/g) in toxic phalaris pastures by
others, was noted. It is suggested that phalaris "sudden death" syndrome could
have as many as 4 different underlying mechanisms, and **that these might
reflect the presence in the plant of a cardio-respiratory toxin, a thiaminase
and amine co-substate, cyanogenic compounds, and nitrate compounds.**

Indian J Med Res 1991 Oct;94:378-83. **Genotoxic effects of some foods & food
components in Swiss mice.** Balachandran B, Sivaswamy SN, Sivaramakrishnan VM
Isotope Division, Cancer Institute, Madras. A number of commonly consumed
foods and food components in south India were **screened for their genotoxic
effects on Swiss mice. Salted, sundried and oil fried vegetables and fishes
induced chromosomal aberrations, sperm head abnormalities and micronuclei
production, which were comparable to the effect of the positive control viz.,
20-methylcholanthrene. Spices like Cissus** quadrangularis (an indigenous herb
used in certain south Indian dishes) and pyrolysed cumin and aniseeds showed
moderate effects. Calamus oil, widely used in pharmaceuticals was highly
effective. All the three parameters of genotoxicity gave similar results.

In Vivo 1998 Nov-Dec;12(6):675-89. **Comparative anticancer effects of
vaccination and dietary factors on experimentally-induced cancers.** Zusman I
Laboratory of Teratology and Experimental Oncology, Koret School of Veterinary
Medicine, Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environmental Quality Sciences,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel. The role of two major factors
were analyzed in the prevention of experimentally-induced cancers: a)
vaccination of animals with polyclonal IgG generated against the soluble p53
antigen and b) feeding of animals with diets rich with dietary fibers or fat.
a) In vaccination, a few attempts have been made to utilize p53 protein as a
tumor suppressor. IgG generated against the cytoplasmic, soluble p53 antigen
from tumor-bearing rats prevents the carcinogenic effect of
1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH) decreasing significantly the number of tumor-
bearing rats in vaccinated group compared with non vaccinated controls and
preventing benign tumors from becoming malignant. The antitumor effect of
vaccination is accompanied by a significant increase in the serum-level of p53
antigen in vaccinated rats compared with non vaccinated controls. The immune
response of a host to vaccination activates the lymph components of the
spleen, and this activation is manifested by the multiplication of the number
of lymphocytes which are generated against specific antigens. This
multiplication is achieved by the higher division of the antigen-specific
lymphoblasts with their subsequent transformation into plasma cells. These
cells synthesize the specific protein (IgG). One such protein is the tumor-
associated p53 protein, which is synthesized by rats against rabbit anti-p53
IgG. b) The role of dietary factors in the prevention of chemically induced
cancer was reviewed on two models: the role of high fiber diets in prevention
of colon cancer, and **the role of high fat diets in the prevention of mammary
gland cancer.** Experiments in colon cancer showed that 20% cellulose
decreased significantly tumor incidence caused by DMH. The tumor-preventive
effect of a cellulose diet was accompanied by increased enzyme concentrations,
such as ornithine decarboxylase, thymidine kinase and beta-glucuronidase. This
effect was accompanied by activation of some cellular mechanisms, i.e.
apoptosis, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and p53 protein
synthesis. **Experiments in mammary glands cancer showed that a 15% olive-oil
diet reduced significantly the tumor incidence caused by
9,10-dimethyl-1,2-benzanthracen e. The antitumor effect of the olive-oil diet
was connected to its content of monounsaturated fatty acids, such as oleic and
palmitic acids. The promotive tumorigenic effects of other high-fat diets
(avocado, soybeans) were associated with high content of some polyunsaturated
fatty acids (linoleic and alpha-linolenic).** Different diets have different
targets. The effect of the same diet depends on its anti-tumor substances
content. CONCLUSIONS: Vaccination and some diets have similar mechanism in
their tumor-preventive effects.

Ann Nutr Metab 1991;35(5):253-60. **Effect of dietary avocado oils on hepatic
collagen metabolism**. Wermam MJ, Mokady S, Neeman I Department of Food
Engineering and Biotechnology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa. The effect of various avocado and soybean oils on collagen metabolism
in the liver was studied in growing female rats for 8 weeks and in day-old
chicks for 1 week. In comparison with rats fed either refined avocado oil,
refined or unrefined soybean oils, rats fed **unrefined avocado oil showed a
significant decrease in total collagen solubility** in the liver, while there
were no changes in total collagen, protein and moisture content. Chicks fed
unrefined avocado oil as compared to those fed refined avocado oil also showed
a decrease in hepatic total soluble collagen while hepatic total collagen
remained unaffected. Electron micrographs and light-microscope examinations of
rats' liver revealed **collagen accumulation in the periportal location. This
is suggestive of the early stages of fibrosis.**

Life Sci 1997;60(19):1635-41. **L-canaline: a potent antimetabolite and anti-
cancer agent from leguminous plants.** Rosenthal GA Laboratory of Biochemical
Ecology, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40506, USA.
[garose@ukcc.uky.edu](mailto:garose@ukcc.uky.edu) L-Canaline, the
L-2-amino-4-(aminooxy)butyric acid structural analog of L-ornithine' is a
powerful antimetabolite stored in many leguminous plants. This nonprotein
amino acid **reacts vigorously with the pyridoxal phosphate moiety of vitamin
B6-containing enzymes to form a covalently-bound oxime that inactivates, often
irreversibly, the enzyme.** Canaline is not only capable of inhibiting
ornithine-dependent enzymic activity, but it also can function as a lysine
antagonist. Recently, this natural product was found to possess significant
antineoplastic in vitro activity against human pancreatic cancer cells.

Food Chem Toxicol 1999 May;37(5):481-91. **Occurrence of emodin, chrysophanol
and physcion in vegetables, herbs and liquors. Genotoxicity and anti-
genotoxicity of the anthraquinones and of the whole plants.** Mueller SO,
Schmitt M, Dekant W, Stopper H, Schlatter J, Schreier P, Lutz WK Department of
Toxicology, University of Wurzburg, Germany. **1,8-Dihydroxyanthraquinones,
present in laxatives, fungi imperfecti, Chinese herbs and possibly vegetables,
are in debate as human carcinogens. We screened a variety of vegetables
(cabbage lettuce, beans, peas), some herbs and herbal-flavoured liquors for
their content of the 'free' anthraquinones emodin, chrysophanol and physcion.
For qualitative and quantitative analysis, reversed-phase HPLC (RP-LC), gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and RP-LC-MS were used. The
vegetables showed a large batch-to-batch variability, from 0.04 to 3.6, 5.9
and 36 mg total anthraquinone per kg fresh weight in peas, cabbage lettuce,
and beans,** respectively. Physcion predominated in all vegetables. **In the
herbs grape vine leaves, couch grass root and plantain herb, anthraquinones
were above the limit of detection. Contents ranged below 1 mg/kg** (dry
weight). All three anthraquinones were also found in seven of 11 herbal-
flavoured liquors, in a range of 0.05 mg/kg to 7.6 mg/kg. The genotoxicity of
the analysed anthraquinones was investigated in the comet assay, the
micronucleus test and the mutation assay in mouse lymphoma L5178Y tk+/-
**cells. Emodin was genotoxic, whereas chrysophanol and physcion showed no
effects. Complete vegetable extract on its own did not show any effect in the
micronucleus test. A lettuce extract completely abolished the induction of
micronuclei by the genotoxic anthraquinone danthron. Taking into
consideration** the measured concentrations of anthraquinones, estimated daily
intakes, the genotoxic potency, as well as protective effects of the food
matrix, the analysed constituents do not represent a high priority genotoxic
risk in a balanced human diet.

Int J Food Sci Nutr 1998 Sep;49(5):343-52. **Lipid content and fatty acid
composition in foods commonly consumed by nursing Congolese women: incidences
on their essential fatty acid intakes and breast milk fatty acids.** Rocquelin
G, Tapsoba S, Mbemba F, Gallon G, Picq C Tropical Nutrition Unit, ORSTOM,
Montpellier, France. The fat content and fatty acid (FA) composition of nearly
40 foods, currently consumed by 102 nursing Congolese mothers living in
Brazzaville, were determined to assess their impact on mothers' essential
fatty acid (EFA) intakes and breast milk FA. Data on mothers' milk FA and
dietary habits which allowed food selection were recently published (Rocquelin
et al., 1998). Most foods were locally produced. Food samples were collected
at local markets, bleached if necessary to avoid microbial degradation, and
stored at +4 degrees C or -20 degrees C. They were lyophilized upon their
arrival in the laboratory before lipid analyses. FA composition of food lipids
was determined by capillary gas chromatography. Staple diets included low-fat,
high-carbohydrate foods (processed cassava roots, wheat bread) and high-
polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) foods: soybean oil (high in 18 : 2 n-6 and
alpha-18 : 3 n-3), bushbutter **(dacryodes edulis), peanuts, avocado (high in
fat and 18 : 2 n-6), freshwater** and salt-water fish (high in LC n-3 and/or
n-6 PUFA), and leafy green vegetables **(low in fat but very high in alpha-18
: 3 n-3). Their frequent consumption by** nursing mothers provided enough EFA
to meet requirements due to lactation. It **also explains why mothers' breast
milk was rich in C8-C14 saturated FA (26% of** total FA) and in n-6, n-3 PUFA
(respectively 15.0% and 2.4% of total FA) highly profitable for breastfed
infants' development. From this point of view, dietary habits of Congolese
mothers have to be sustained for they are more adequate than most Western-type
diets.

Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1990;7(2-3):69-85. **Dietary carcinogens,
environmental pollution, and cancer: some misconceptions.** Ames BN, Gold LS
Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of California,
Berkeley 94720. Various misconceptions about dietary carcinogens, pesticide
residues, and cancer **causation are discussed. The pesticides in our diet are
99.99% natural, since plants make an enormous variety of toxins against fungi,
insects, and animal predators. Although only 50 of these natural pesticides
have been tested in** animal cancer tests, about half of them are carcinogens.
About half of all chemicals tested in animal cancer tests are positive. The
proportion of natural pesticides positive in animal tests of clastogenicity is
also the same as for synthetic chemicals. It is argued that testing chemicals
in animals at the maximum tolerated dose primarily measures chronic cell
proliferation, a threshold process. Cell proliferation is mutagenic in several
ways, including inducing mitotic recombination, and therefore chronic
induction of cell proliferation is a risk factor for cancer.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1980 Aug;77(8):4961-5. **Fecalase: a model for
activation of dietary glycosides to mutagens by intestinal flora.** Tamura G,
Gold C, Ferro-Luzzi A, Ames BN Many substances in the plant kingdom and in
man's diet occur as glycosides. Recent studies have indicated that many
glycosides that are not mutagenic in tests such as the Salmonella test become
mutagenic upon hydrolysis of the glycosidic linkages. The Salmonella test
utilizes a liver homogenate to approximate mammalian metabolism but does not
provide a source of the enzymes present in intestinal bacterial flora that
hydrolyze the wide variety of glycosides present in nature. We describe a
stable cell-free extract of human feces, fecalase, which is shown to contain
various glycosidases that allow the in vitro activation of many natural
glycosides to mutagens in the Salmonella/liver homogenate test. Many
beverages, such as red wine (but apparently not white wine) and tea, contain
glycosides of the mutagne quercetin. Red wine, red grape juice, and tea were
mutagenic in the test when fecalase was added, and red wine contained
considerable direct mutagenic activity in the absence of fecalase. The
implications of quercetin mutagenicity and carcinogenicity are discussed.

Br J Rheumatol 1994 Aug;33(8):790-1. **Even garlic.** Sweetman BJ

Nutr Cancer 1988;11(4):251-7. **Cytotoxicity of extracts of spices to cultured
cells.** Unnikrishnan MC, Kuttan R Amala Cancer Research Centre, Kerala,
India. The cytotoxicity of the extracts from eight different spices used in
the Indian diet was determined using Dalton's lymphoma ascites tumor cells and
human lymphocytes in vitro and Chinese Hamster Ovary cells and Vero cells in
tissue culture. Alcoholic extracts of the spices were found to be more
cytotoxic to these cells than their aqueous extracts. Alcoholic extracts of
several spices inhibited cell growth at concentrations of 0.2-1 mg/ml in vitro
and 0.12-0.3 mg/ml in tissue culture. **Ginger, pippali (native to India; also
called dried catkins), pepper, and garlic showed the highest activity followed
by asafetida, mustard, and horse-gram (native to India). These extracts also
inhibited the thymidine uptake into DNA.**

J Toxicol Sci 1984 Feb;9(1):77-86. **[Mutagenicity and cytotoxicity tests of
garlic]. [** Article in Japanese] Yoshida S, Hirao Y, Nakagawa S Mutagenicity
and cytotoxicity of fresh juice and alcohol extract from garlic were studied
by Ames' test, Rec assay, Micronucleus test and the check of the influence to
HEp 2 and chinese hamster embryo (CHE) primary cultured cells. No evidence of
mutagenicity of these samples were observed in Ames' test and Rec assay, while
there was dose dependent increase of micronucleated cells and
polychromatocytes on the bone marrow cells of mice and chinese hamsters
treated with garlic juice. There were severe damages, e.g. growth inhibition
and morphological changes of both cultured cells due to garlic juice, but no
or slightly cytotoxic signs were observed even in high concentration of garlic
extract. A higher sensitivity to the cytotoxic effects of garlic was seen by
the present findings with CHE primary cells than HEp 2 cell line.

Chung Hua Chung Liu Tsa Chih 1985 Mar;7(2):103-5 **[Comparison of the
cytotoxic effect of fresh garlic, diallyl trisulfide, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU),
mitomycin C (MMC) and Cis-DDP on two lines of gastric cancer cells].**
[Article in Chinese] Pan XY Teratog Carcinog Mutagen 1998; 18(6):293-302 **In
vitro and in vivo study of the clastogenicity of the flavone cirsitakaoside
extracted from Scoparia dulcis L. (Scrophulariaceae).** Pereira-Martins SR,
Takahashi CS, Tavares DC, Torres LM Department of Biology, Federal University
of Maranhao, Sao Luis, MA. Brazil.
[smartins@rgm.fmrp.usp.br](mailto:smartins@rgm.fmrp.usp.br) The mutagenic
effect of the flavone cirsitakaoside extracted from the medicinal herb
Scoparia dulcis was evaluated in vitro by using human peripheral blood
cultures treated with doses of 5, 10, and 15 microg of the flavone/ml culture
medium for 48 h. The compound proved to be mutagenic at the highest
concentration tested (15 microg/ml). Furthermore, the proliferative index was
significantly reduced in all cultures treated with the flavone, although the
mitotic index was not reduced. However, the clastogenic activity of the
flavone cirsitakaoside was not observed when Swiss mice were treated orally
with doses of 10, 20, and 30 mg/animal for 24 h.

Proc Nutr Soc 1977 Sep;36(2):51A. **Attempts to overcome anti-nutritive
factors in field beans (Vicia faba L) and field peas (Pisum sativum) fed in
diets to laying hens.** Davidson J

Am J Clin Nutr 1995 Sep;62(3):506-11. **The influence of genetic taste markers
on food acceptance.** Drewnowski A, Rock CL Human Nutrition Program, School of
Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-2029, USA. Genetically
mediated sensitivity to the bitter taste of phenylthiocarbamide **(PTC) and
6-n-propylthiouracil (Prop) has long been associated with enhanced sensitivity
to other sweet and bitter compounds. New studies suggest that tasters and
supertasters of Prop may also differ from notasters in their taste preferences
and in their patterns of food rejection and food acceptance. One question is
whether the acceptability of bitter-tasting vegetables is influenced by Prop
taster status. Cruciferous vegetables are among the major dietary** sources of
potentially chemoprotective agents in cancer control, and their consumption is
reported to alter cancer risk. Strategies aimed at dietary change in
individuals or groups should consider the role of genetic taste markers and
their potential influences on food preferences and dietary habits.

J Environ Sci Health B 1999 Jul;34(4):681-708. **Accumulation of potentially
toxic elements in plants and their transfer to human food chain.** Dudka S,
Miller WP University of Georgia, Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, Athens
30602-2727, USA. Contaminated soils can be a source for crop plants of such
elements like As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, and Zn. The excessive transfer of As,
Cu, Ni, and Zn to the food chain is controlled by a "soil-plant barrier";
**however, for some elements, including Cd, the soil-plant barrier fails.**
The level of Cd ingested by average person in USA is about 12 micrograms/day,
which is relatively low comparing to Risk Reference Dose (70 micrograms
Cd/day) established by USEPA. **Food of plant origin is a main source of Cd
intake by modern society.** Fish and shellfish may be a dominant dietary
sources of Hg for some human populations. **About half of human Pb intake is
through food, of which more than half originates from plants.** Dietary intake
of Cd and Pb may be increased by application of sludges on cropland with
already high levels of these metals. Soils amended with sludges in the USA
**will be permitted (by USEPA-503 regulations) to accumulate Cr, Cd, Cu, Pb,
Hg, Ni, and Se, and Zn to levels from 10 to 100 times the present baseline
concentrations.** These levels are very permissive by international standards.
Because of the limited supply of toxicity data obtained from metals applied in
sewage sludge, predictions as to the new regulations will protect crop plants
from metal toxicities, and food chain from contamination, are difficult to
make.

BJU Int 2000 Jan;85(1):107-13. **A maternal vegetarian diet in pregnancy is
associated with hypospadias. The ALSPAC Study Team. Avon Longitudinal Study of
Pregnancy and Childhood.** North K, Golding J Unit of Paediatric and Perinatal
Epidemiology, Division of Child Health, University of Bristol, UK. OBJECTIVE:
To investigate the possible role of the maternal diet, particularly
vegetarianism and consumption of phytoestrogens, in the origin of hypospadias,
which is reported to be increasing in prevalence. SUBJECTS AND METHODS:
Detailed information was obtained prospectively from mothers, including
previous obstetric history, lifestyle and dietary practices, using structured
self-completed questionnaires during pregnancy. Previously recognized
associations with environmental and parental factors were examined, focusing
particularly on the hypothesized hormonal link. Multivariate logistic
regression was used to identify independent associations. RESULTS: Of 7928
boys born to mothers taking part in the Avon Longitudinal Study of Pregnancy
and Childhood, 51 hypospadias cases were identified. There were no significant
differences in the proportion of hypospadias cases among mothers who smoked,
consumed alcohol or for any aspect of their previous reproductive history
(including the number of previous pregnancies, number of miscarriages, use of
the contraceptive pill, time to conception and age at menarche). **Significant
differences were detected for some aspects of the maternal diet, i.e.
vegetarianism and iron supplementation in the first half of pregnancy. Mothers
who were vegetarian in pregnancy had an adjusted odds ratio (OR) of 4.99 (95%
confidence interval, CI, 2.10-11.88) of giving birth to a boy with
hypospadias, compared with omnivores who did not supplement their diet with
iron. Omnivores who supplemented their diet with iron had an adjusted OR of
2.07 (** 95% CI, 1.00-4.32). The only other statistically significant
association for hypospadias was with influenza in the first 3 months of
pregnancy (adjusted OR 3.19, 95% CI 1.50-6.78). CONCLUSION: As vegetarians
have a greater exposure to phytoestrogens than do omnivores, these results
support the possibility that phytoestrogens have a deleterious effect on the
developing male reproductive system.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

