![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Vitamin E: Estrogen antagonist, energy promoter, and anti-inflammatory**  
_

Vitamin E, like progesterone and aspirin, acts within the cellular regulatory
systems, to prevent inflammation and inappropriate excitation. Since
uncontrolled excitation causes destructive oxidations, these substances
prevent those forms of oxidation.

Molecules that can easily be oxidized and reduced can function as
antioxidants, and vitamin E does function as that kind of antioxidant in many
chemical environments. But it is highly misleading to consider that as the
explanation for its many beneficial biological effects. That kind of reasoning
contributed to the use of the antioxidant carcinogens BHT and BHA as food
additives and "antiaging" supplements, and many other chemicals are being
promoted on the basis of their abstract antioxidant function.

Becoming aware of the real value of vitamin E will have far reaching
implications in nutrition and medicine.  

In determining criminal or civil legal responsibility, the concept "should
have known" is recognized and used. In science, which is all about knowing,
there is certainly a responsibility to be informed when the subject involves
the life and health of millions of people. The science establishment of
government and industry should be held responsible for the information it
hides, destroys, or ignores for its own benefit. The US government has an
agency for prosecuting research fraud, but the concept is applied so narrowly
as to be meaningless, when deception has become the rule. And since it
controls the court system, govenment agencies and their functionaries won't be
prosecuted, even when their crimes become well known.

"Vitamin E was advocated as an effective treatment for heart disease by Dr. Ev
_an Shute of London, Ontario more than 50 years ago._ __ _His pioneering
claims, which were unacceptable to the medical community at large, have been
confirmed by recent findings from epidemiologic studies and clinical trials._
_"_

_

* * *

Political scientists have recognized the process in which big corporations
"capture" the governmental agencies that were created to regulate them. The
editorial boards of professional journals can be captured even more cheaply
than the agencies of government, and their influence can be even more valuable
to industry.

If science impinges upon the plans of an industry, it can be managed into
compliance, when the industry controls the journals and the agencies that fund
research.

In the 1940s, it had already become clear to the estrogen industry that
vitamin E research was impinging on its vital interests.

The Manhattan Project, that created the atomic bomb, also created a generation
of scientific and bureaucratic zealots who ignored public health and safety to
advance their projects and their careers, and changed the way science was
done. At exactly the same time, the pharmaceutical industry was using its
financial and political power to change the way medicine was practiced and
taught, and the consequences for world health rivalled those of the nuclear
industry.

In 1933 the physician R.J. Shute was aware of the problems associated with
toxemia of pregnancy or preeclampsia. Especially among poorly nourished women,
many pregnancies were complicated by circulatory problems, including cyclic
bleeding, thrombosis, stroke, and hypertension, and these difficult
pregnancies often ended in miscarriage or premature delivery, resulting in
many serious health problems among the babies that survived.

At that time, both estrogen and vitamin E were being widely studied, though
the exact structure of the tocopherol molecule wasn't defined until 1936-37.
Vitamin E had been found to improve fertility of both male and female animals,
and to prevent intrauterine death of the embryo or fetus, so it was called the
"antisterility vitamin." Using it to prevent women from having miscarriages
must have occurred to many people.

Animal research in the 1930s was also showing that estrogen had many toxic
effects, including causing infertility or intrauterine death, connective
tissue abnormalities, and excessive blood clotting. Dr. Shute and his sons,
Wilfred and Evan, were among those who considered vitamin E to be an
antiestrogen. They found that it was very effective in preventing the clotting
diseases of pregnancy.

Other researchers, who knew that progesterone protected against the toxic
effects of estrogen, described vitamin E as the "progesterone-sparing agent,"
since so many of its antiestrogenic effects resembled those of progesterone.

The Shute brothers began using vitamin E to treat circulatory diseases in
general, rather than just in pregnant women--blood clots, phlebitis,
hypertension, heart disease, and diabetes all responded well to treatment with
large doses.

Vitamin E, as its name indicates, was the fifth type of "vitamin" factor to be
identified, and it received its name in 1922, even though its chemical
structure hadn't been identified. The public quickly understood and accepted
that certain substances in food were essential for life and health, so by 1940
practically all physicians were recommending the use of nutritional
supplements.

If vitamin E was essential for human health, and achieved at least some of its
amazing effects by opposing estrogen, then the synthetic estrogen industry had
a problem.

Edward L. Bernays had already been in business for decades, teaching
corporations and governments how to "engineer consent." After his work for the
government to engineer support for entering the first world war, Bernays' next
big job was for the tobacco industry. To convince women to smoke cigarettes,
to achieve equality with men, he organized an Easter parade, Torches of
Freedom, in which thousands of women marched smoking their freedom torches. In
association with the American Medical Association (the editor of JAMA actually
helped the tobacco industry design its campaigns), Bernays ran a campaign to
convince Americans that smoking was good for the health.

The drug industry began using his techniques in sometimes crude but always
effective ways. Estrogen was named "the female hormone;" natural hormones,
including estrogen and progesterone, were claimed, without any research, to be
inactive when taken orally. Physician-shills were created to claim wonderful
effects for estrogen. The vitamin status of the tocopherols was denied; as
recently as the 1970s (and maybe later), university professors of dietetics
were flatly saying "no one needs vitamin E."

Very little research showing the curative effects of vitamin E in human
diseases was allowed to be published, so it was only occasionally necessary to
openly denounce vitamin E as worthless or dangerous. In 1981, the journal of
the AMA published an article reviewing the "toxic" effects of vitamin E. Since
I had read all of the articles cited, I realized that the author was claiming
that whenever vitamin E changed something, the change was harmful, even though
the original publication had described the effect as beneficial.

Although JAMA was eventually forced to give up its revenue from cigarette
advertising, it didn't suffer at all, because of the vast advertising
campaigns of the estrogen industry. JAMA obviously wouldn't want to publish
anything suggesting that vitamin E, or progesterone, or thyroid, might be
beneficial because of its antagonism of the harmful effects of estrogen.

Estrogen causes changes in the uterus that prevent implantation of the embryo,
and that impair support for its development if it has already implanted. It
decreases the availability of oxygen to the embryo, while vitamin E increases
it.

My dissertation adviser, A.L. Soderwall, did a series of experiments in which
he showed that providing hamsters with extra vitamin E postponed the onset of
infertility in middle age. In my experiments, vitamin E increased the amount
of oxygen in the uterus, correcting an oxygen deficiency produced either by
supplemental estrogen or by old age. Progesterone has similar effects on the
delivery of oxygen to the uterus.

In the 1940s, the official definition of vitamin E's activity was changed.
Instead of its effectiveness in preventing the death and resorption of
embryos, or the degeneration of the testicles or brain or muscles, it was
redefined as an antioxidant, preventing the oxidation of unsaturated oils.

Although some people continued to think of it as a protective factor against
thrombosis, heart attacks, diabetes, and infertility, the medical
establishment claimed that the prevention or cure of diseases in animals
wasn't relevant to humans, and that a mere antioxidant couldn't prevent or
cure any human disease.

The experiments that led to the identification of vitamin E involved feeding
rats a diet containing rancid lard and, as a vitamin A supplement, cod liver
oil. Both of these contained large amounts of polyunsaturated oils.

From 1929 to the early 1930s, other researchers were claiming to have
demonstrated that the polyunsaturated fatty acids were nutritionally
essential. These experiments, like the vitamin E experiments, were done on
rats, but the medical establishment was satisfied that rat experiments proved
that humans need linoleic or linolenic acid, while they refused to accept that
vitamin E was essential for humans. When, in the 1940s, a group of vitamin B6
researchers showed that the supposed "essential fatty acid deficiency" could
be cured by a supplement of vitamin B6, it became apparent that the
polyunsaturated fatty acids slowed metabolism, and reduced all nutritional
needs. The thyroid hormone was powerfully suppressed by the "essential" fatty
acids.

When we consider the two sets of experiments together, their outstanding
feature is the toxicity of the polyunsaturated oils, which in one kind of
experiment suppressed metabolism, and in the other kind of experiment created
a variety of degenerative conditions.

By the late 1940s and early 1950s, estrogens of various sorts had been
synthesized from hydrocarbons, and were being recommended to prevent
miscarriages, because "estrogen is the female hormone." The meat industry had
found that the polyunsaturated oils were valuable in animal feed, since they
suppressed metabolism and made it cheaper to fatten the animals, and these
antithyroid oils were next marketed as "heart protective" human foods, though
by suppressing the thyroid and destroying vitamin E, they actually contributed
to both heart disease and cancer. (Giving estrogen to livestock to improve
their feed efficiency, and to people "to prevent heart attacks," was an
interesting parallel to the oil promotional campaigns.)

The influence of the food oil industry kept researchers away from the idea
that these oils were not safe for food use, and instead tended to support the
idea that vitamin E is just an antioxidant, and that the seed oils were the
best way to get vitamin E in the diet.

The antifertility effects of the polyunsaturated oils, demonstrated in the
vitamin E experiments, weren't at the time understood to have anything to do
with estrogen's antifertility effects. But to understand vitamin E, I think we
have to consider the close interactions between estrogen and the polyunsatured
fatty acids (PUFA). Their actions are closely intertwined, and are antagonized
by a variety of energizing and stabiliizing substances, including saturated
fats, progesterone, thyroid, vitamin E, and aspirin.

Generally, chemicals that inhibit enzymes are toxic, producing some sort of
symptom or deterioration. But a group of enzymes related to estrogen and PUFA
are inhibited by these protective substances. Although under our present diet,
these enzymes metabolize the PUFA, in the fetus and newborn they act on our
endogenous fats, the series related to the Mead acids. The Mead acid is
antiinflammatory, and broadly protective. The dietary PUFA interfere with
these natural protective substances,

The enzymes that, if we didnt eat PUFA, would be regulating the Mead series,
being activated in response to stress, would be producing antistress
substances, which would limit the stress reaction. But as we become
increasingly saturated with the anti-vitamin E fats, these enzymes, instead of
stopping inflammation, promote it and cause tissue injury. The remaining
stress limiting factors, such as progesterone, by correcting the distortions
caused by stress, tend to eliminate the conditions which activated the enzymes
--in a very indirect form of inhibition.

Many of the events involved in inflammation are increased by estrogen, and
decreased by vitamin E. Estrogen causes capillaries to become leaky; vitamin E
does the opposite. Estrogen increases platelet aggregation, and decreases a
factor that inhibits platelet aggregation; vitamin E does the opposite.

Excess clotting is known to be caused by too much estrogen, and also by a
vitamin E deficiency.

Clotting leads to fibrosis, and there is clear evidence that vitamin E
prevents and cures fibrotic diseases, but this still isn't generally accepted
by the powerful medical institutions. Estrogen and polyunsaturated fats
increase fibrosis.

Estrogen increases progstaglandin synthesis, vitamin E decreases their
synthesis; estrogen increases the activity of the enzymes COX and LOX, vitamin
E decreases their activitiy. (Jiang, et al., 2000; Ali, et al., 1980;
Parkhomets, et al., 2001.) Estrogen releases enzymes from lysosomes, vitamin E
inhibits their release. Beta-glucuronidase, one of these enzymes, can release
estrogen at the site of an inflammation.

Estrogen often increases intracellular calcium and protein kinase C, vitamin E
has generally opposite effects.

The polyunsaturated fatty acids and their derivatives, the prostaglandins, act
as effectors, or amplifiers, of estrogen's actions.

If vitamin E is acting as a protectant against the polyunsaturated fatty
acids, that in itself would account for at least some of its antiestrogenic
effects.

Besides antagonizing some of the end effects of the toxic fatty acids, vitamin
E inhibits lipolysis, lowering the concentration of free fatty acids (the
opposite of estrogens effect), and it also binds to, and inactivates, free
fatty acids. The long saturated carbon chain is very important for its full
functioning, and this saturated chain might allow it to serve as a substitute
for the omega -9 fats, from which the Mead acid is formed. The unsaturated
tocotrienols have hardly been tested for the spectrum of true vitamin E
activity, and animal studies have suggested that it may be toxic, since it
caused liver enlargement.

One possibly crucial protective effect of vitamin E against the
polyunsaturated fatty acids that hasn't been explored is the direct
destruction of linolenic and linoleic acid. It is known that **bacterial
vitamin E is involved in the saturation of unsaturated fatty acids, and it is
also known that intestinal bacteria turn linoleic and linolenic acids into the
fully saturated stearic acid.**

**"No metabolic function is known for alpha-tocopherolquinol or its quinone
other than as a cofactor in the biohydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids
that can be carried out by only a few organisms."**

**_P.E. Hughes and S.B. Tove, 1982._**

**_Linoleic acid was significantly decreased (P < 0.001) and there was a
significant rise (P < 0.05) in its hydrogenation product, stearic acid.
Linolenic acid was also significantly decreased. . . . The study provides
evidence that bacteria from the human colon can hydrogenate C18 essential
polyunsaturated fatty acids._**

_F.A. Howard & C. __Henderson, 1999_

Because of the way in which the decision to call vitamin E a simple
antioxidant was conditioned by the historical setting, there has been a
reluctance, until recently, to give much weight to the pathogenicity of lipid
peroxidation and free radicals, partly because lipid peroxidation is only a
minor part of the toxicity of the polyunsaturated oils, and there was little
support for the investigation of the real nature of their toxicity. This
environment has even distorted the actual antioxidant value of the various
forms of vitamin E. (For example, see Chen, et al., 2002.)

The people who say that vitamin E is nothing but an antioxidant sometimes take
other antioxidants, with, or instead of, vitamin E. BHT, BHA, and many natural
compounds (derived from industrial and agricultural wastes) are often said to
be "better than vitamin E" as antioxidants. Anything that can be oxidized and
reduced (melatonin, estrogen, tryptophan, carotene, etc.) will function as an
antioxidant in some system, but in other circumstances, it can be a pro-
oxidant.

The people who think there is benefit in the abstract "antioxidant" function
seem to be thinking in terms of something that will, like a ubiquitous fire
department, put out every little fire as soon as it starts. I think it's more
appropriate to think of the biological antioxidant systems as programs for
controlling the arsonists before they can set the fires.

Since the requirement for vitamin E decreases as the consumption of
unsaturated fats decreases, the requirement, if any, would be very small if we
didn't eat significant quantities of those fats.

In the years since the tocopherols were identified as vitamin E, the material
sold for research and for use as a nutritional supplement has changed
drastically several times, even when it has been given a specific chemical
identity, such as mixed tocopherols or d-alpha tocopherol. Variations in
viscosity and color, caused by changes in the impurities, have undoubtedly
influenced its biological effects, but the ideology about its antioxidant
value has kept researchers from finding out what a particular batch of it
really is and what it really does.

**"We compared the effect of a mixed tocopherol preparation with that of
alpha-tocopherol alone on superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and iNOS
expression in cultured myocytes exposed to** **H-R." "Both tocopherol
preparations attenuated cell injury. . . . However, mixed-tocopherol
preparation was much superior to alpha-tocopherol in terms of myocyte
protection. . . . Lack of efficacy of commercial tocopherol preparations in
clinical trials may reflect absence of gamma- and delta-tocopherols."**

**Chen _H, Li D, Saldeen T, Romeo F, Mehta JL,Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002
"Mixed tocopherol preparation is superior to alpha-tocopherol alone against
hypoxia-reoxygenation injury."_**

Keeping our diet as free as possible of the polyunsaturated fats, to create
something like the "deficiency" state that is so protective (against cancer,
trauma, poison, shock, inflammation, infection, etc.) in the animal
experiments, seems preferable to trying to saturate ourselves with
antioxidants, considering the imperfectly defined nature of the vitamin E
products, and the known toxicity of many of the other antioxidants on the
market.

The carcinogenic properties of the polyunsaturated fats have been known for
more than 50 years, as has the principle of extending the life span by
restricted feeding. More recently several studies have demonstrated that the
long lived species contain fewer highly unsaturated fats than the short lived
species. **Restriction of calories prevents the lipids in the brain, heart,
and liver from becoming more unsaturated with aging.** (Lee, et al., 1999;
Laganiere, et al., 1993; Tacconi, et al., 1991; R. Patzelt-Wenczler, 1981.)

When cells are grown in tissue culture without the essential fatty acids,
they become deficient, and in that state are very resistant to chemical
injury, and can be grown indefinitely. Besides being a simple demonstration of
the way in which the polyunsaturated fats sensitize cells to injury (Wey, et
al., 1993), these experiments must be an embarrassment to the people who base
their argument for the oils essentiality on a supposed requirement for
making cell membranes. Since the cells can multiply nicely in their
deficient state, we have to conclude that the oils arent needed for
membranes, or maybe that cells resist injury better without membranes.

In the opposite direction, an excess of insulin or prolactin, or a deficiency
of vitamin E, increases the activity of the enzymes that convert linoleic acid
into the more highly unsaturated fatty acids. Excess insulin and prolactin are
crucially involved in many degenerative diseases.

The highly unsaturated fats suppress respiration in many ways, and these
trends toward increased unsaturation with aging, endocrine stress, and vitamin
E deficiency parallel the life-long trend toward lower energy production from
respiration. Many studies show that vitamin E can protect and improve
mitochondrial energy production. (Kikuchi, et al., 1991; Donchenko, et al.,
1990, 1983; Guarnieri, et al., 1981, 1982.) But the state of so-called
essential fatty acid deficiency not only makes mitochondria very resistant to
injury, it greatly intensifies their energy production. Vitamin E
supplementation is seldom as effective as the absence of the toxic oils.

Many nutrition charts no longer list liver as a good source of vitamin E, but
a large portion of an animals vitamin E is in its liver. This bias in the
dietetic literature can be traced to various sources, but a major influence
was the campaign in the 1970s by the drug companies that had patented new
forms of synthetic vitamin A. They had physicians and professors fabricate
stories about the great toxicity of natural vitamin A, and placed the stories
in national magazines, to clear the field for their supposedly non-toxic
products, which have turned out to be disastrously toxic. The result is that
many people have fearfully stopped eating liver, because of its vitamin A. The
other vitamins in liver, including vitamin K, function very closely with
vitamin E, and the stably stored forms of vitamin E are likely to be a good
approximation for our needs.

There is still a strong division between what people can say in their
professional publications, and what they believe. A man who was influential in
designating vitamin E as an antioxidant, M.K. Horwitt, complained when the
government raised its recommended vitamin E intake by 50%, because it wasnt
supported by new data, and because millions of people get only ten milligrams
per day and are healthy. But he has been taking 200 mg daily (plus aspirin)
for many years. He apparently doesn't have very much confidence in the ideas
he advocates publicly.  

REFERENCES

Prostaglandins Med 1980 Feb;4(2):79-85. **Inhibition of human platelet
cyclooxygenase by alpha-tocopherol.** Ali M, Gudbranson CG, McDonald JW.
Alpha-tocopherol, an inhibitor of platelet aggregation, was evaluated for its
**effects on the synthesis of thromboxane and prostaglandins. A dose-dependent
reduction in thromboxane B2 and prostaglandin D2 synthesis was observed with**
approximately 60% inhibition at 5.0 IU or alpha-tocopherol. Alpha-tocopherol
produced a time-dependent, irreversible inhibition.

Int J Vitam Nutr Res 2001 Jan;71(1):18-24. **Vitamin E and the prevention of
atherosclerosis.** Bron D, Asmis R. Recent new findings have shed new light
**on the physiological role of vitamin E and suggest that it has a much
broader array of biological activities than originally expected. In addition
to its well described role as an antioxidant, it is becoming evident that
vitamin E also can modulate the immune system, suppress local and chronic
inflammation, reduce blood coagulation and thrombus formation, and enhance
cell function and survival.**

Plast Reconstr Surg 1981 Nov;68(5):696-9. **The effectiveness of alpha-
tocopherol (vitamin E) in reducing the incidence of spherical contracture
around breast implants.** Baker JL Jr. Vitamin E appears to be a safe, simple,
and inexpensive means of reducing the number of postoperative capsular
contractures following breast augmentation. The synthetic form of vitamin E
(alpha-tocopherol) is recommended to avoid nausea or skin eruptions in
patients with oily skin, which are frequently encountered when the natural
form is taken. No harmful side effects have been noted in any of the patients
to date. Vitamin E has no effect on coagulation systems and does not cause
excessive bleeding either during or after surgery. The recommended dosage of
synthetic vitamin E is 1000 IU, b.i.d., for 2 years beginning 1 week before
surgery. If no contracture exists at that time, the dosage may be reduced to
1000 IU daily thereafter.

Carcinogenesis 1999 Jun;20(6):1019-24. **Decrease in linoleic acid metabolites
as a potential mechanism in cancer risk reduction by conjugated linoleic
acid.** Banni S, Angioni E, Casu V, Melis MP, Carta G, Corongiu FP, Thompson
H, Ip C.

Mech Ageing Dev 1978 Nov;8(5):311-28. **Anomalous vitamin E effects in
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism.** Baumgartner WA, Hill VA, Wright ET.
Three different vitamin E effects, suggestive of specific antioxidant effects,
were discovered in the protective action of vitamin E against respiratory
decline (a decrease in mitochondrial respiration attributed to a "leakage" of
electron transport radicals). **No correlation was found between respiraotry
decline and random lipid peroxidation.** The mechanisms behind two of the
three atypical vitamin E effects were defined. Both involve an artifact in the
TBA assay for lipid peroxidation. This artifact occurs when TBA assays are
carried **out in the presence of sucrose and acetaldehyde; the latter is
produced from ethanol, the solvent used to add vitamin E to preparations. The
artifact in the TBA assay for peroxidations appears also to be responsible for
differing interpretations of the hepatotoxic effect of ethanol.**

Eur J Biochem 1990 Mar 10;188(2):327-32. **Polychlorinated biphenyls increase
fatty acid desaturation in the proliferating endoplasmic reticulum of pigeon
and rat livers.** Borlakoglu JT, Edwards-Webb JD, Dils RR.

Nutr Cancer 2000;38(1):87-97. **Effects of topical and oral vitamin E on
pigmentation and skin cancer induced by ultraviolet irradiation in Skh:2
hairless mice.** Burke KE, Clive J, Combs GF Jr, Commisso J, Keen CL, Nakamura
RM. **Results showed that the skin concentrations of Eol, as well as levels
in the adipose tissue, were increased after topical application. Mice treated
with each form of vitamin E showed no signs of toxicity and had significantly
less acute and chronic skin damage induced by UV irradiation, as indicated by
reduced inflammation and pigmentation and by later onset and lesser incidence
of skin cancer.**

Am J Physiol 1991 Jun;260(6 Pt 2):R1235-40. **Acute phase response in
exercise. II. Associations between vitamin E, cytokines, and muscle
proteolysis.** Cannon JG, Meydani SN, Fielding RA, Fiatarone MA, Meydani M,
Farhangmehr M, Orencole SF, Blumberg JB, Evans WJ.

Vrach Delo 1990 Dec;(12):6-8. **[The effect of tocopherol and nicotinic acid
on the microcirculation and blood coagulability in patients with ischemic
heart disease]** Chernomorets NN, Kotlubei GV, Vatutin NT, Zhivotovskaia IA,
Gnilitskaia VB, Alifanova RE, Lobach EIa, Mal'tseva NV, Mitrofanov AN.
Complex treatment using tocopherol acetate produced a positive effect on the
coagulation properties of the blood and did essentially influence the
fibrinolytic activity and microcirculation. Tocopherol plus nicotinic acid
resulted in normalization of the blood coagulation process, **favoured
activation of fibrinolysis and improvement of the microcirculatory bed.**

Free Radic Biol Med 1991;10(5):325-38. **Oxidative status and oral
contraceptive. Its relevance to platelet abnormalities and cardiovascular
risk.** Ciavatti M, Renaud S. INSERM Unit 63, Bron, France. **Oral
contraceptive (OC) use is a risk for thrombogenic events.** From these data
we conclude that: **1\. OC use modifies slightly but significantly the
oxidative status in women and in animals by decreasing in plasma and blood
cells the antioxidant defenses** (vitamins and enzymes). 2. The changes in the
oxidative status are related to an increase in plasma lipid peroxides
apparently responsible for the hyperaggregability and possibly the imbalance
in clotting factors associated with the OC-induced prethrombotic state. **3\.
These effects of OC appear to be increased by a high intake of polyunsaturated
fat and counteracted by supplements of vitamin E.** 4\. The risk factors
acting synergistically with OC, have all been shown to increase platelet
reactivity.

Bol Med Hosp Infant Mex 1980 May-Jun;37(3):457-67. **[Jaundice caused by
microangiopathic hemolysis associated to septicemia in the newborn]**
Covarrubias Espinoza G, Lepe Zuniga JL. These infants with over 3% fragmented
cells **were found to have a significant association with: sepsis, jaundice,
crenated RBC's, low levels of hemoglobin, increased reticulocyte count, and
low vitamin E levels.**

Endocrinology 1992 Nov;131(5):2482-4. **Vitamin E protects hypothalamic beta-
endorphin neurons from estradiol neurotoxicity.** Desjardins GC, Beaudet A,
Schipper HM, Brawer JR. **Estradiol valerate (EV) treatment has been shown to
result in the destruction of 60% of beta-endorphin neurons in the hypothalamic
arcuate nucleus. Evidence suggests that the mechanism of EV-induced
neurotoxicity involves the conversion of estradiol to catechol estrogen and
subsequent oxidation to free radicals in local peroxidase-positive
astrocytes.** In this study, we examined whether treatment with the
antioxidant, vitamin E, protects beta-endorphin neurons from the neurotoxic
action of estradiol. **Our results demonstrate that chronic vitamin E
treatment prevents the decrement in hypothalamic beta-endorphin concentrations
resulting from arcuate beta-endorphin cell loss, suggesting that the latter is
mediated by free radicals.** **Vitamin E treatment also prevented the onset of
persistent vaginal cornification and polycystic ovarian condition which have
been shown to result from the EV-induced hypothalamic pathology.**

Free Radic Biol Med 2000 Dec 15;29(12):1302-6. **Hyperinsulinemia: the missing
link among oxidative stress and age-related diseases?** Facchini FS, Hua NW,
Reaven GM, Stoohs RA. **Other proaging effects of insulin involve the
inhibition of proteasome and the stimulation of polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA) synthesis and of nitric oxide (NO). The hypothesis that
hyperinsulinemia accelerates aging also offers a** **metabolic explanation for
the life-prolonging effect of calorie restriction** and of mutations
decreasing the overall activity of insulin-like receptors in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans.

J Bacteriol 1982 Sep;151(3):1397-402. **Occurrence of alpha-tocopherolquinone
and alpha-tocopherolquinol in microorganisms.** Hughes PE, Tove SB. Both
alpha-tocopherolquinol and alpha-tocopherolquinone were found in 56 of 93
strains of microorganisms examined. Those microorganisms that did not
contain alpha-tocopherolquinol or alpha-tocopherolquinone tended to fall into
two groups. One group consisted of gram-positive, anaerobic or facultative
bacteria with a low content of guanine and cytosine, and the second group
encompassed all of the filamentous microorganisms studied **. "No metabolic
function is known for alpha-tocopherolquinol or its quinone other than as a
cofactor in the biohydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids that can be
carried out by only a few organisms."**

J Biol Chem 1980 Dec 25;255(24):11802-6. **Identification of deoxy-alpha-
tocopherolquinol as another endogenous electron donor for biohydrogenation.**
Hughes PE, Tove SB.

J Biol Chem 1980 May 25;255(10):4447-52. **Identification of an endogenous
electron donor for biohydrogenation as alpha-tocopherolquinol.** Hughes PE,
Tove SB. The ratio of alpha-tocopherolquinone produced to fatty acid reduced
was 2:1 when the tocopherol derivatives were extracted aerobically. When the
extraction was carried out anaerobically, the ratio was 1. It is suggested
that the oxidation of 2 molecules of alpha-tocopherolquinol, each to the
semiquinone, provides the electrons required for the reduction of the cis-bond
of the conjugated dienoic fatty acid.

Lett Appl Microbiol 1999 Sep;29(3):193-6. **Hydrogenation of polyunsaturated
fatty acids by human colonic bacteria.** Howard FA, Henderson C. Emulsions of
the fatty acids linoleic (C18:2 n-6), alpha-linolenic (C18:3 n-3) and
arachidonic acid (C20:4 n-6) were incubated for 4 h under anaerobic conditions
with human faecal suspensions. **Linoleic acid was significantly decreased (P
< 0.001) and there was a significant rise (P < 0.05) in its hydrogenation
product, stearic acid. Linolenic acid was also significantly decreased (P <
0.01), and significant increases in C18:3 cis-trans isomers (P < 0.01) and
linoleic acid (P < 0.05) were seen. With each acid, there were non-significant
increases in acids considered to be intermediates in biohydrogenation. The
study provides evidence that bacteria from the human colon can hydrogenate C18
essential polyunsaturated fatty acids.** However, with arachidonic acid there
was no evidence of hydrogenation.

Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1998 Dec;59(6):395-400. **Modulation
of rat liver lipid metabolism by prolactin.** Igal RA, de Gomez Dumm IN, Goya
RG.

Clin Chim Acta 1994 Mar;225(2):97-103. **Vitamin E and the hypercoagulability
of neonatal blood.** Jain SK, McCoy B, Wise R. **There was a significant
correlation between plasma vitamin E and whole blood clotting time (r = 0.54,
P < 0.04) of cord blood. The addition of standard vitamin E to cord blood in
vitro resulted in prolongation of whole blood clotting time. This suggests
that a deficiency of plasma vitamin E can shorten whole blood clotting time in
newborns, which may have a role in the disseminated intravascular coagulation
frequently experienced by newborn infants.**

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 Oct 10;97(21):11494-9. **gamma-tocopherol and
its major metabolite, in contrast to alpha-tocopherol, inhibit cyclooxygenase
activity in macrophages and epithelial cells.** Jiang Q, Elson-Schwab I,
Courtemanche C, Ames BN **. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-catalyzed synthesis of
prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) plays a key role in inflammation and its
associated diseases, such as cancer and vascular heart disease. Here we report
that gamma-tocopherol (gammaT) reduced PGE(2) synthesis in both
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages and IL-1beta-treated
A549 human epithelial cells with an apparent IC(50) of 7.5 and 4 microM,
respectively. The inhibitory effects of gammaT and gamma-CEHC stemmed from
their inhibition of COX-2 activity, rather than affecting protein expression
or substrate availability, and appeared to be independent of antioxidant
activity.** The inhibitory potency of gammaT and gamma-CEHC was diminished
by an increase in AA concentration, suggesting that they might compete with AA
at the active site of COX-2. We also observed a moderate reduction of nitrite
accumulation and suppression of inducible nitric oxide synthase expression by
gammaT in lipopolysaccharide-treated macrophages. These findings indicate that
gammaT and its major metabolite possess anti-inflammatory activity and that
gammaT at physiological concentrations may be important in human disease
prevention.

Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 1992 Sep;56(9):1420-3. **Effects of alpha-tocopherol
and tocotrienols on blood pressure and linoleic acid metabolism in the
spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR).** Koba K, Abe K, Ikeda I, Sugano M. Both
alpha-tocopherol and a 1:1.7 mixture of alpha-tocopherol and tocotrienols at a
0.2% dietary level significantly depressed the age-related increase in the
systolic blood pressure of spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) after 3
weeks of feeding. **The aortic production of prostacyclin was increased 1.5
times both by alpha-tocopherol and a tocotrienol mixture, suggesting a
possible relevance to their hypotensive** effect. These vitamins did not
influence the delta 6- and delta 5-desaturase activities of liver microsomes,
**but fatty acid profiles of the liver phospholipids predicted a reduction of
linoleic acid desaturation.** These effects were in general more clear with
tocotrienols than with alpha-tocopherol. Platelet aggregation by 5 microM ADP
remained uninfluenced. Thus, tocotrienols may have effects on various lipid
parameters somewhat different from those of alpha-tocopherol.

Gerontology 1993;39(1):7-18. **Modulation of membrane phospholipid fatty acid
composition by age and food restriction.** Laganiere S, Yu BP. H.M.
Phospholipids from liver mitochondrial and microsomal membrane preparations
were analyzed to further assess the effects of age and lifelong calorie
restriction on membrane lipid composition. **The data revealed
characteristic patterns of age-related changes in ad libitum (AL) fed rats:**
**membrane levels of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, 22:4 and 22:5,
increased progressively, while membrane linoleic acid (18:2) decreased
steadily with age. Levels of 18:2 fell by approximately 40%, and 22:5 content
almost doubled making the peroxidizability index increase with age.**   **We
concluded that the membrane-stabilizing action of long-term calorie
restriction relates to the selective modification of membrane long-chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids during aging.** 

Free Radic Biol Med 1999 Feb;26(3-4):260-5. **Modulation of cardiac
mitochondrial membrane fluidity by age and calorie intake.** Lee J, Yu BP,
Herlihy JT. **The fatty acid composition of the mitochondrial membranes of
the two ad lib fed groups differed: the long-chain polyunsaturated 22:4 fatty
acid was higher in the older group, although linoleic acid (18:2) was lower.
DR eliminated the differences.** Considered together, these results suggest
that DR **maintains the integrity of the cardiac mitochondrial membrane
fluidity by minimizing membrane damage through modulation of membrane fatty
acid profile.**

Lipids 2001 Jun;36(6):589-93. **Effect of dietary restriction on age-related
increase of liver susceptibility to peroxidation in rats.** Leon TI, Lim BO,
Yu BP, Lim Y, Jeon EJ, Park DK.

Jpn J Pharmacol 1979 Apr;29(2):179-86. **Effect of linoleic acid hydroperoxide
on liver microsomal enzymes in vitro.** Masuda Y, Murano T. Rat liver
microsomes incubated with linoleic acid hydroperoxide (LAHPO) lost cytochrome
P-450 specifically among the enzymes of microsomal electron transport systems.
The loss of cytochrome P-450 content and glucose-6-phosphatase activity by
LAHPO was accompanied by an increase in malondialdehyde (MDA) production.
These results suggest the possibility that the loss of microsomal enzyme
activities during lipid peroxidation may be attributed **largely to a direct
attack on enzyme proteins by lipid peroxides rather than** indirectly to a
structural damage of microsomal membranes resulting from peroxidative
breakdown of membrane lipids.

Ukr Biokhim Zh 2001 Jan-Feb;73(1):43-7. **[Effect of alpha-tocopherol,
tocopheryl quinone and other complexes with tocopherol-binding proteins on the
activity of enzymes metabolizing arachidonic acid]** Parkhomets' VP, Silonov
SB, Donchenko HV. Palladin Institute of Biochemistry, National Academy of
Science of Ukraine, Kyiv. alpha-Tocopherol, tocopherylquinon jointly with the
proteins tocopherol acceptors from cytosole **were identified to inhibit the
activity of 5-lipoxigenase and so the synthesis of leukotriene A4 at the early
stages providing for A4 hydrolase activation and C4 synthesase,** as well as
accelerate leukotrienes B4 and C4 synthesis at the further stages respectively
changing the final spectrum of leukotriens in the organism tissues. Firstly,
the leading role of proteins complexes capable to strengthen the effect of
alpha-tocopherol and tocopherylquinon on arachidonic acid oxidative metabolism
was determined.

Int J Vitam Nutr Res 1981;51(1):26-33. **[Effect of vitamin E on the synthesis
of polyunsaturated fatty acids]** Patzelt-Wenczler R. The formation of
polyunsaturated fatty acids is influenced by vitamin E. The enzyme of the
endoplasmic reticulum isolated from rat liver responsible for chain elongation
and desaturation showed higher activity under vitamin E-deficiency. The
activity was raised both per mg protein and per mg DNA. The application of
alpha-Tocopherol to the vitamin E-deficient animals caused the normalization
of the enzyme activity within 48 hours. This indicates a regulatory function
of alpha-Tocopherol in the process of oxidation.

Lipids 2001 May;36(5):491-8. **Correlation of fatty acid unsaturation of the
major liver mitochondrial phospholipid classes in mammals to their maximum
life span potential.** Portero-Otin M, Bellmunt MJ, Ruiz MC, Barja G, Pamplona
R.

Free Radic Biol Med 1999 Oct;27(7-8):729-37. **Age-dependent increase of
collagenase expression can be reduced by alpha-tocopherol via protein kinase C
inhibition.** Ricciarelli R, Maroni P, Ozer N, Zingg JM, Azzi A. Our in vitro
experiments with skin fibroblasts suggest that alpha-tocopherol may protect
against skin aging by decreasing the level of collagenase expression, which is
induced by environmental insults and by aging.

Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1991 Oct;44(2):89-92. **Inhibition of
PGE2 production in macrophages from vitamin E-treated rats.** Sakamoto W,
Fujie K, Nishihira J, Mino M, Morita I, Murota S.

Int J Vitam Nutr Res 1990;60(1):26-34. **The influence of vitamin E on
rheological parameters in high altitude mountaineers.** Simon-Schnass I,
Korniszewski L. **The erythrocyte filterability was unaltered in the vitamin
E group in comparison with baseline but was significantly impaired in the
control group.**

Neurobiol Aging 1991 Jan-Feb;12(1):55-9. **Aging and food restriction: effect
on lipids of cerebral cortex.** Tacconi MT, Lligona L, Salmona M, Pitsikas N,
Algeri S. In experimental animals dietary restriction reduces the body weight
increase due to aging, increases longevity and delays the onset of age-related
physiological deterioration, including age-related changes in serum lipids.
Little is known about the influence of food restriction on brain lipids, whose
concentration and composition have been shown to change with age. We studied
whether some biochemical and biophysical parameters of rat brain membranes,
known to be modified with age, were affected by a diet low in calories, in
which 50% of lipids and 35% of carbohydrates have been replaced by fibers. The
diet was started at weaning and maintained throughout the animal's entire life
span. Animals fed the low calorie diet survived longer and gained less body
weight than standard diet fed rats. Age-related increases in microviscosity,
cholesterol/phospholipid and sphingomyelin/phosphatidylcholine ratios were
**reduced or restored to the levels of young animals in cortex membranes of 32
old rats fed the low calorie diet, while the age-related increase in mono- to
polyunsaturated fatty acid ratios in phospholipids was further raised.** In
conclusion we have shown that a diet low in calories and high in fibers
affects lipid composition in the rat brain, **in a direction opposite to that
normally believed to reduce age-related deterioration of brain functions**.

Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1993 May;120(1):72-9. **Essential fatty acid deficiency
in cultured human keratinocytes attenuates toxicity due to lipid
peroxidation.** Wey HE, Pyron L, **Human keratinocytes are commonly grown in
culture with a serum-free medium. Under these conditions, keratinocytes become
essential fatty acid deficient (EFAD), as determined by gas chromatographic
analysis of cell phospholipid fatty acid composition. Exposure of EFAD
keratinocytes for 2 hr to concentrations of t-butyl hydroperoxide (tBHP) up to
2 mM did not result in toxicity assessed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
release and only a small indication of lipid peroxidation assessed by the
release of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances** (TBARS). Addition of 10
microM linoleic acid (LA) to serum-free medium alleviated the EFAD condition
by increasing the phospholipid content of LA and its elongation and
desaturation products, arachidonic acid and docosatetraenoic acid. Exposure of
LA-supplemented keratinocytes to tBHP resulted in significant LDH (at 1 and 2
mM tBHP) and TBARS (tBHP concentration dependent) release. TBARS release was
also significantly elevated in unexposed LA-supplemented keratinocytes (basal
release). Co-supplementation with the antioxidant, **alpha-tocopherol
succinate (TS) prevented tBHP (1 mM)-induced LDH release in LA-supplemented
cultures. TS supplementation also attenuated the effect of tBHP on TBARS
release, but when compared to TS-supplemented EFAD cultures, LA**
supplementation still led to increased tBHP-induced TBARS release.
Keratinocyte cultures are potentially useful as an alternative to animals in
toxicology research and testing. It is important, however, that the cell model
provide a response to toxic insult similar to that experienced in vivo. Our
results suggest that fatty acid and antioxidant nutrition of cultured
keratinocytes are important parameters in mediating the toxic effects of lipid
peroxidation.

Cancer Lett 1997 Jan 1;111(1-2):179-85. **Subcutaneous, omentum and tumor
fatty acid composition, and serum insulin status in patients with benign or
cancerous ovarian or endometrial tumors. Do tumors preferentially utilize
polyunsaturated fatty acids?** Yam D, Ben-Hur H, Dgani R, Fink A, Shani A,
Berry EM.

_AC Chan, J. of Nutrition, 1998_  
"The response-to-injury hypothesis explains atherosclerosis as a chronic
inflammatory response to injury of the endothelium, which leads to complex
cellular and molecular interactions among cells derived from the endothelium,
smooth muscle and several blood cell components. Inflammatory and other
stimuli trigger an overproduction of free radicals, which promote peroxidation
of lipids in LDL trapped in the subendothelial space. Products of LDL
oxidation are bioactive, and they induce endothelial expression and secretion
of cytokines, growth factors and several cell surface adhesion molecules. The
last-mentioned are capable of recruiting circulating monocytes and T
lymphocytes into the intima where monocytes are differentiated into
macrophages, the precursor of foam cells. In response to the growth factors
and cytokines, smooth muscle cells proliferate in the intima, resulting in the
narrowing of the lumen. Oxidized LDL can also inhibit endothelial production
of prostacyclin and nitric oxide, two potent autacoids that are vasodilators
and inhibitors of platelet aggregation. Evidence is presented that vitamin E
is protective against the development of atherosclerosis. Vitamin E enrichment
has been shown to retard LDL oxidation, inhibit the proliferation of smooth
muscle cells, inhibit platelet adhesion and aggregation, inhibit the
expression and function of adhesion molecules, attenuate the synthesis of
leukotrienes and potentiate the release of prostacyclin through up-regulating
the expression of cytosolic phospholipase A2 and cyclooxygenase. Collectively,
these biological functions of vitamin E may account for its protection against
the development of atherosclerosis."  

6: Early Hum Dev 1994 Nov 18;39(3):177-88  
Vitamin A and related essential nutrients in cord blood: relationships with
anthropometric measurements at birth. Ghebremeskel K, Burns L, Burden TJ,
Harbige L, Costeloe K, Powell JJ, Crawford M. Institute of Brain Chemistry and
Human Nutrition, Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children, London, UK. Following
the advice given by the Department of Health to women who are, or may become
pregnant, not to eat liver and liver products because of the risk of vitamin A
toxicity, the concentrations of vitamins A and E, and copper, magnesium and
zinc in cord blood were investigated. The study was conducted in Hackney, an
inner city area of London. Esters of vitamin A were not detected in any of the
samples, indicating that there was no biochemical evidence of a risk of
toxicity. Indeed, vitamin A correlated significantly with birthweight, head
circumference, length, and gestation period. There was also a significant
positive relationship between zinc and birthweight. In contrast, copper showed
a negative correlation with birthweight and head circumference. Vitamin E and
magnesium were not associated with any of the anthropometric measurements,
although magnesium showed an increasing trend with birthweight. The data
suggest that most of the mothers of the subjects studied may have been
marginal with respect to vitamins A and E and zinc. In those with low
birthweight babies. a higher intake would have improved their nutritional
status and possibly the outcome of their pregnancy. For these low-income
mothers, liver and liver products are the cheapest and the best source of
vitamins A and E, haem iron, B vitamins and several other essential nutrients;
hence the advice of the Department of Health may have been misplaced.

© Ray Peat 2006. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com

  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

