![](http://raypeat.com/images/rp3.gif)  
---  
  
  
**A R T I C L E  
  
Water: swelling, tension, pain, fatigue, aging**  

I have spoken to many people who believe they should drink "8 glasses of water
every day," in addition to their normal foods, even if they don't feel
thirsty. Many doctors still recite this dangerous slogan, but the addition of
the qualifying phrase, "or other liquids," has become common.

The amount of water a person needs is extremely variable, depending on things
such as metabolic rate, activity, and the temperature and humidity of the air.
Working hard in hot, dry weather, it's possible to drink more than two quarts
per hour for more than eight hours, without forming any urine, because all of
the water is lost by evaporation. But in very hot, humid weather, a person
with a low metabolic rate can be endangered by the smallest amount of water
(e.g., "Meteorological relations of eclampsia in Lagos, Nigeria," Agobe, et
al., 1981).

Most foods contain a considerable amount of water, usually more than 70% of
their weight, and some water is produced in cells by metabolism. The function
of water in the organism has been mystified and neglected because of some
deeply rooted cultural images of the nature of organisms and their cellular
make-up.

One silly image that has been perpetuated by schools and textbooks is that
biochemistry consists of chemical reactions that occur in substances dissolved
in water, and that the water is retained by cells because they are enclosed by
an oily membrane, and because of the osmotic forces produced by the dissolved
substances. Most grade school kids have seen an osmometer made from an egg, in
which the egg causes a column of water to rise, and have heard the explanation
that this has something to do with the way cells work. Membrane pumps are
invoked to explain the differences in solute concentrations and "osmotic
pressure" inside and outside cells. The story is that invisible things on the
surface of a cell (in its "membrane") force dissolved molecules to move in
ways that they wouldn't move spontaneously by diffusion, and that water
passively follows the "actively transported" solutes. But the evidence shows
that both water and its solutes are regulated by the bulk phase of the cell,
not its surface.

In some cultural settings, animism has a kind of charm (water sprites, and
such), but in the culture of medicine and biology, the animistic
conceptualization of cells and their mechanisms has been very destructive,
because it gets in the way of coherent understanding of physiology.
Practically every disease would be approached differently if the physiology of
water and ions were allowed to advance beyond the animistic doctrines of
mainstream medicine, such as the "membrane pumps." If all the substances that
are said to be "actively transported" by pumps into, or out of, cells are
considered, the amount of energy required to operate the pumps is at least 15
times larger than the total energy available to cells. "Specific" pumps are
commonly invoked even for novel synthetic chemicals, to explain their unequal
distribution, inside and outside cells. In many biological situations water is
ignored, but when it becomes an issue, its distribution is usually
mechanistically subordinated to the solutes that are actively "pumped."

Cells aren't osmometers, in the sense the textbooks say. They do control their
water content, but no "membrane pumps" are needed. It's more accurate to think
of the water of cells as being "dissolved in cells," somewhat the way water is
contained in jello or boiled eggs. The cell controls its hydration by the
processes that control its structure, its metabolism, and movements, because
water is part of its deepest structures and essential functions. The cell's
adjustments to changes of hydration and volume appear to be regulated by
contractile proteins and energy metabolism (Minkoff and Damadian, 1976).

Any stress or energy deficit that disturbs cellular structure or function
disturbs the interactions among water, proteins, and other components of the
cell. Excitation causes a cell to take up extra water, not by osmosis
resulting from an increase in the concentration of solutes in the cell, or
because the membrane has become porous, but because the structural proteins of
the cell have momentarily increased their affinity for water.

This increased affinity is similar to the process that causes a gel to swell
in the presence of alkalinity, and it is related to the process called
electroosmosis, in which water moves toward a higher negative charge. Intense
excitation or stress increases the cell's electrically negative charges, and
causes it to become more alkaline and to swell. Swelling and alkalinity cause
the cell to begin the synthesis of DNA, in preparation for cell division.
Mitogens and carcinogens, including estrogen, cause cells to become alkaline
and to swell, and substances that block the cell's alkalinization (such as the
diuretics acetazolamide and amiloride) inhibit cell division. Prolonged
alkaline stress alone can cause malignant transformation of kidney cells
(Oberleithner, et al., 1991).

The general idea of "stress" is useful, because it includes processes such as
fatigue, osmotic pressure changes, disturbed pH, and the enzyme changes that
follow, producing substances such as lactic acid, nitric oxide, polyamines,
estrogen, serotonin, and many more specific mediators. But paying attention to
the physical factors involved in a stress reaction is important, if we are to
see the organism integrally, rather than as a collection of "specific
biological mechanisms," involving things like the pixie-powered "membrane
pumps."

When a cell shrinks under hyperosmolar conditions, its metabolism becomes
catabolic, breaking down proteins and glycogen, and sometimes producing lactic
acid, which results in an alkaline shift, increasing the cell's affinity for
water, and causing it to return to normal size. A slight degree of
hyperosmolarity increases the cell's metabolic rate.

Swelling in hypo-osmolar conditions, i.e,, with an excess of water, is
anabolic, leading to cellular proliferation, and inhibiting the breakdown of
protein and glycogen.

Respiring cells are always producing some water, by transferring hydrogen from
fuel molecules to oxygen. Respiration also produces carbon dioxide, which in
itself is a Lewis acid (meaning that it binds electrons, rather than releasing
protons), that associates with cellular proteins, acidifying them in the
process. A large amount of carbon dioxide can exist inside cells in the bound
form. Acidified cytoplasm (like any other mostly acidic polymer-gel) releases
water and sodium. (This process is physically analogous to the process of
flushing a water softener with salt, or a demineralizer with acid, to
reactivate it.)

Besides binding with the cytoplasm, the carbon dioxide can be changed into
carbonic acid, by chemically combining with water. Carbonic acid is
hydrophilic, and so it quickly leaves the cell, taking with it some of the
oppositely charged ions, such as calcium and sodium. The formation of carbonic
acid, which is constantly streaming out of the respiring cell, causes some
water and some positively ionized metals to leave the cell, in an "active"
process, that doesn't require any mysterious pumps.

As the blood passes through the lungs, carbon dioxide leaves the system, and
as carbonic acid is converted to carbon dioxide, water is left behind in the
blood, along with the counterions (of alkaline metals or earths), accounting
for slight differences in pH and osmolarity between the bloodstream and the
tissue cells. Some experiments suggest that the normal osmolarity of various
tissues is 2 or 3 times higher than that of the blood, which is called
"isosmolar" or isotonic.

The kidneys adjust the osmolarity of the blood by allowing water and solutes
to leave the bloodstream, in proportions that usually keep the body fluids in
balance with cells. The kidneys are able to compensate for many of the
imbalances produced by stress and inappropriate diets, for example by forming
ammonia and carbon dioxide, to compensate for imbalances in the alkalis and
acids that are being delivered to the blood by other organs. Because of the
kidneys' great ability to regulate the flow of solutes between the blood and
the forming urine, the "membrane pumps" have great importance for medical
nephrologists. But the more extreme the "active transport" is, the more
obvious it becomes that processes other than "membrane pumps" are responsible.

Some lizards and sea birds have glands near their noses that are called salt
glands, because of their ability to secrete salt. The salt gland is probably
the most extreme case of active transport, but its physiology is very similar
to the physiology of any other secretory gland or membrane, such as tear
glands and sweat glands. The mechanism of salt excretion in these glands
should really settle the issue of how active transport works, but most
nephrologists, oculists, and medical researchers in general aren't interested
in salt glands.

Carbon dioxide is the driving force in the salt gland. The constant formation
of CO2, and its loss into the air, allows a high concentration of salt to be
excreted. Blocking the interchange of CO2 and carbonic acid, with
acetazolamide, or inhibiting the formation of CO2, prevents the excretion of
salt.

Since respiratory metabolism, governed by the thyroid hormone, is our main
source of carbon dioxide, it's obvious that thyroid deficiency should impair
our ability to regulate water and solutes, such as salt. An organism that
illustrates this function of thyroid is the young salmon, when it leaves a
freshwater river to begin its life in the ocean. As it converts its physiology
to tolerate the salty environment, its thyroid hormone surges. When it's
mature, and returns to the fresh water to spawn, its prolactin rises sharply.
In experiments with rodents, it has been found that drinking a large amount of
water increases their prolactin, but the same amount of water, with added
salt, doesn't.

Hypothyroidism is typically associated with increased prolactin secretion.
Hypothyroid people typically retain water, while losing salt, so the
hypothyroid state is analogous to the salmon that has returned to the river,
and to the mice that drink too much salt-free water.

The typical hypothyroid person loses salt rapidly in the urine (and probably
in the sweat, too, though that is usually diagnosed as cystic fibrosis), and
retains water, diluting the urine less than normal. The reduced production of
carbon dioxide, with increased susceptibility to producing lactate and
ammonium, causes the cells to be more alkaline than normal, increasing their
affinity for water. The rise of estrogen that usually accompanies
hypothyroidism also increases intracellular pH, loss of sodium, and over-
hydration of the blood.

Hypothyroid muscles typically retain excess water, and fatigue easily, taking
up more water than normal during exertion. In childhood, mild hypothyroidism
often causes the leg muscles to swell and ache in the evenings, with what have
been called "growing pains." When the problem is more extreme, all the
skeletal muscles can become very large (Hoffman syndrome), because of the
anabolic effect of over-hydration. Enlargement of any muscle can result from
the excessive hydration produced by thyroid deficiency, but when it happens to
the muscles behind the eyes (Itabashi, et al., 1988), it often leads to a
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, rather than hypothyroidism.

The little kids with the Hoffman syndrome don't have the bloated myxedematous
appearance that's often associated with hypothyroidism. They look athletic to
a ridiculous degree, like miniature body-builders. But after a few weeks of
treatment with thyroid, they regain the slender appearance that's normal for
their age. The swollen state actually supports enlargement of the muscle, and
the cellular processes are probably closely related to the muscle swelling and
growth produced by exercise. The growth of the muscle cell during swelling
seems to be the result of normal repair processes, in a context of reduced
turnover of cellular proteins.

The people who believe in membrane pumps that maintain normal solute
distributions by active transport know that the pumps would require energy
(far more than the cell can produce, but they don't confront that issue), and
so their view requires that they assign a great part of the cell's resources
just to maintaining ionic homeostasis, and the result of that is that they
tend to neglect the actual energy economy of the cell, which is primarily
devoted to the adaptive renewal of the cell structure and enzyme systems, not
to driving the systems that don't exist.

The "anabolic" balance of the swollen cell is the result of decreased turnover
of the cell's components. The higher rate of metabolism produced by adequate
thyroid function maintains a high rate of renewal of the cell's systems,
keeping the cell constantly adjusted to slight changes in the organism's
needs. The evidence of a high rate of bone turnover is sometimes taken as
evidence that thyroid can cause osteoporosis.

Later, in a more mature person, chronically fatigued and painful muscles that
at one time would have been diagnosed as rheumatism, may be diagnosed as
fibromyalgia. Most doctors are reluctant to prescribe thyroid supplements for
the problem, but the association of elevated prolactin with the muscle
disorder is now generally recognized.

The hypo-osmolar blood of hypothyroidism, increasing the excitability of
vascular endothelium and smooth muscle, is probably a mechanism contributing
to the high blood pressure of hypothyroidism. The swelling produced in
vascular endothelium by hypo-osmotic plasma causes these cells to take up
fats, contributing to the development of atherosclerosis. The generalized
leakiness affects all cells (see "Leakiness" newsletter), and can contribute
to reduced blood volume, and problems such as orthostatic hypotension. The
swollen endothelium is stickier, and this is suspected to support the
metastasis of cancer cells. Inflammation-related proteins, including CRP, are
increased by the hypothyroid hyperhydration. The heart muscle itself can
swell, leading to congestive heart failure.

Some of the nerve problems associated with hypothyroidism (e.g., carpal tunnel
syndrome and "foot drop") are blamed on compression of the nerves, from
swelling of surrounding tissues, but the evidence is clear that hypothyroidism
causes swelling in the nerve cells themselves. For example, in hypothyroidism,
nerves are slow to respond to stimulation, and their conduction of the impulse
is slow. These changes are the same as those produced by hyper-hydration
caused by other means. Hypothyroid nerves are easily fatigued, and fatigued
nerves take up a large amount of water. Swelling of the spinal cord is
probably responsible for the "spinal stenosis" commonly seen in domestic
animals and people; the mobility of intracellular water molecules is
distinctly increased in patients with compression of the spinal cord
(Tsuchiya, et al., 2003; Ries, et al., 2001).

The hyperhydration of hypothyroidism has been known to cause swelling and
softening of cartilage, with deformation of joints, but somehow it has never
dawned on surgeons that this process would lead to deformation of
intervertebral disks.

It has been known for a long time that hyperhydration can produce seizures
**;** at one time, neurologists would test for epilepsy by having the patient
drink a pint of water. Although there are many reasons to think that the
hyperhydration produced by hypothyroidism is a factor in epilepsy, physicians
have been very reluctant to consider the possibility, because they generally
think of thyroid hormone as a stimulant, and believe that "stimulants" are
necessarily inappropriate for people with epilepsy.

While it's true that the thyroid hormone increases sensitivity to adrenaline,
its most noticeable effect is in improving the ability to relax, including the
ability to sleep soundly and restfully. And it happens that increasing
norepinephrine (the brain's locally produced form of adrenaline) helps to
prevent seizures (Giorgi, et al., 2004).

Cell swelling increases the sensitivity of nerves, and hyperosmotic shrinkage
lowers their sensitivity. Increasing carbon dioxide helps to reduce the
hydration of tissue (for example, the hydration and thickness of the cornea
are decreased when carbon dioxide is increased), and increasing carbon dioxide
is known to inhibit epileptic seizures. Another diagnostic trick of
neurologists was to have the patient hyperventilate; it would often bring on a
seizure. The diuretic acetazolamide, which increases the body's carbon dioxide
and reduces water retention, is very effective for preventing seizures.

The sleep-inducing effect of salty food is probably related to the anti-
excitatory effects of hyperosmolarity, of adequate thyroid function, and of
carbon dioxide.

Degenerative diseases, especially cancer, heart disease, and brain diseases,
are less prevalent in populations that live at a high altitude. When oxygen
pressure is low, the lungs lose carbon dioxide more slowly, and so the amount
of carbon dioxide retained in the body is greater. If the basic problem in
hypothyroidism is the deficient production of carbon dioxide causing excessive
loss of salt and retention of water, resulting in hypo-osmotic body fluids,
then we would expect people at high altitude to have better retention of salt,
more loss of water, and more hypertonic body fluids. That has been observed in
many studies. The increased rate of metabolism at altitude would be consistent
with the relatively active "catabolism" of the slightly hyperosmotic
condition.

After the drug companies began, in the late 1950s, marketing some newly
discovered (thiazide) diuretics, which cause sodium to be lost in the urine,
their advertising campaigns created a cultish belief that salt caused
hypertension. They convinced a whole generation of physicians that pregnant
women should limit salt in their diet, take a diuretic preventively, and
restrict calories to prevent "excessive" weight gain. Millions of women and
their babies were harmed by that cult.

Pre-eclampsia and pregnancy toxemia have been corrected (Shanklin and Hodin,
1979) by both increased dietary protein and increased salt, which improve
circulation, lower blood pressure, and prevent seizures, while reducing
vascular leakiness. The effectiveness of increased salt in pre-eclampsia led
me to suggest it for women with premenstrual edema, because both conditions
typically involve high estrogen, hyponatremia, and a tendency toward hypo-
osmolarity. Estrogen itself causes sodium loss, reduced osmolarity, and
increased capillary leakiness. Combined with a high protein diet, eating a
little extra salt usually helps to correct a variety of problems involving
edema, poor circulation, and high blood pressure.

The danger of salt restriction in pregnancy has hardly been recognized by most
physicians, and its danger in analogous physiological situations is much
farther from their consideration.

One of the things that happen when there isn't enough sodium in the diet is
that more aldosterone is synthesized. Aldosterone causes less sodium to be
lost in the urine and sweat, but it achieves that at the expense of the
increased loss of potassium, magnesium, and probably calcium. The loss of
potassium leads to vasoconstriction, which contributes to heart and kidney
failure and high blood pressure. The loss of magnesium contributes to
vasoconstriction, inflammation, and bone loss. Magnesium deficiency is
extremely common, but a little extra salt in the diet makes it easier to
retain the magnesium in our foods.

Darkness and hypothyroidism both reduce the activity of cytochrome oxidase,
making cells more susceptible to stress. A promoter of excitotoxicity,
ouabain, or a lack of salt, can function as the equivalent of darkness, in
resetting the biological rhythms (Zatz, 1989, 1991).

Bone loss occurs almost entirely during the night, and the nocturnal rise in
cortisol and prolactin has strongly catabolic effects, but many other pro-
inflammatory substances also rise during the night, and are probably the basic
cause of the increased catabolism. Increased salt in the diet appears to
improve some aspects of calcium metabolism, such as reducing parathyroid
hormone and increasing ionized calcium, when the diet is deficient in calcium
(Tordoff, 1997).

The kidneys can produce large amounts of carbon dioxide and ammonia, in the
process of preventing the loss of electrolytes, while allowing acid to be lost
in the urine. The ammonia is produced by the breakdown of protein. During
stress or fasting, the loss of tissue protein can be minimized by
supplementing the minerals, potassium, sodium, magnesium, and calcium. Salt
restriction can cause aldosterone to increase, and excess aldosterone causes
potassium loss, and increases the use of protein to form ammonia (Norby, et
al., 1976; Snart and Taylor, 1978; Welbourne and Francoeur, 1977).

Aldosterone secretion increases during the night, and its rise is greater in
depressed and stressed people. It inhibits energy metabolism, increases
insulin resistance, and increases the formation of proinflammatory substances
in fat cells (Kraus, et al., 2005). During aging, salt restriction can produce
an exaggerated nocturnal rise in aldosterone.

During the night, there are many changes that suggest that the thyroid
functions are being blocked, for example a surge in the thyroid stimulating
hormone, with T4 and T3 being lowest between 11 PM and 3 AM (Lucke, et al.,
1977), while temperature and energy production are at their lowest. This
suggests that the problems of hypothyroidism will be most noticeable during
the night.

Rheumatoid arthritis and asthma are two inflammatory conditions that are
notoriously worse during the night. Melatonin has been reported to be higher
in patients with severe asthma and rheumatoid arthritis, and to promote the
secretion of a variety of other pro-inflammatory substances. The peak of
melatonin secretion is followed by the peak of aldosterone, and a little later
by the peak of cortisol.

The use of bright light (which suppresses melatonin) to treat depression
probably helps to inhibit the production of aldosterone, which is strongly
associated with depression.

Both aldosterone and melatonin can contribute to the contraction of smooth
muscle in blood vessels. Constriction of blood vessels in the kidneys helps to
conserve water, which is adaptive if blood volume has been reduced because of
a sodium deficiency. When blood vessels are inappropriately constricted, the
blood pressure rises, while organs don't receive as much blood circulation as
they need. This impaired circulation seems to be what causes the kidney damage
associated with high blood pressure, which can eventually lead to heart
failure and multiple organ failure.

Progesterone, which helps to maintain blood volume (partly by preventing
vascular leakiness, preventing excessive sodium loss and by supporting albumin
synthesis) antagonizes aldosterone. Aldosterone antagonists are now being
recognized as effective treatments for hypertension, water retention,
congestive heart failure, arrhythmia, diabetes, kidney disease, and a great
variety of inflammatory problems. (Synthetic drugs to antagonize aldosterone
are most effective when they are most like natural progesterone.) Since
aldosterone contributes to fibrosis of the heart and kidneys
(nephrosclerosis), progesterone, the "antifibromatogenic steroid," should be
helpful for those problems that have been considered irreversible. Aldosterone
appears to contribute to the hyperglycemia of diabetes itself, and not just to
its complications, by interfering with the interactions of insulin and
cortisol (Yamashita, et al., 2004).

One of progesterone's fundamental actions is to cause estrogen "receptors" to
disintegrate; hypertonicity has this effect in some situations. Estrogen's
effects are largely produced by increased tissue hydration.

Aldosterone causes cells to take up sodium, while increasing their pH, i.e.,
raising their alkalinity (Mihailidou and Funder, 2005). Intracellular sodium
has long been known to be a factor, along with swelling and alkalinity, in
stimulating cell division (Cone and Tongier, 1971). A lack of salt stimulates
the formation of serotonin, which in turn stimulates aldosterone synthesis--
that is, a sodium restricted diet activates processes that cause cells to take
up sodium inappropriately, in a situation reminiscent of the calcium deficient
diet causing inappropriate calcification.

Aldosterone, like stress or hypo-osmolarity, activates the enzyme (ODC) which
produces the polyamines, that promote cell division, and that can probably
account for some of the harmful effects of excessive aldosterone.

Eating salty food around bedtime usually has a sleep-inducing effect, and it
helps to maintain blood volume (which tends to decrease during the night), and
to restrain the nocturnal rise of aldosterone, and other indicators of stress
or inflammation. Eating gelatin, which lacks tryptophan, will reduce the
formation of serotonin, and is likely to limit the formation of aldosterone.

Pregnenolone can sometimes very quickly allow swollen tissues to release their
water. This function is probably closely related to its antifibromatogenic
function, since swelling and leaking set the stage for fibrosis.

Hyperosmotic sodium chloride solutions (e.g., 7.5%) are being used more often
for treating trauma and shock, because the concentrated solution increases
blood volume by removing water from the extravascular spaces, unlike the
"isotonic" saline (0.9% sodium chloride), which usually adds to the edema by
leaking out of the blood vessels.

A 5% sodium chloride solution is effective for promoting healing of damaged
corneas, and solutions of 5% to 10% sodium chloride are effective for
accelerating the healing of wounds and ulcers. Other hypertonic solutions, for
example glucose or urea, have been used therapeutically, but sodium chloride
seems to be the most effective in a variety of situations.

Thyroid hormone, by maintaining oxidative metabolism with the production of
carbon dioxide, is highly protective against excessive water retention and
loss of sodium and magnesium.

Sometimes doctors recommend that constipated people should drink extra water,
"to soften the stool." The colon is where water is removed from the intestinal
contents, and when it is inflamed, it removes too much water. Several decades
ago, it was recognized (Orr, et al., 1931) that hypertonic saline, given
intravenously, would stimulate intestinal peristalsis, and could be used to
treat paralytic ileus and intestinal obstruction.

When water is taken orally, it is absorbed high in the intestine, long before
it reaches the colon, so the recommendation to drink water for constipation
can produce a situation that's the opposite of intravenous hypertonic saline,
by diluting the blood. Using a hypertonic salt solution as an enema can have
the same beneficial effect on the intestine as the intravenous treatment.

Constipation physiology is probably analogous to the physiology of congestive
heart failure, in which muscles are weakened and fatigued by swelling.

In recent decades, the prevalence of congestive heart failure has increased
tremendously, so that it is now often called an epidemic. Hyponatremia (too
little salt, or too much water) is a recognized "risk factor" for congestive
heart failure. In the failing heart, the muscle cells are swollen, causing the
heart wall to stiffen, weakening its ability to pump. Osmotically shrinking
the cells can restore their function.

The swollen heart, like any muscle, loses the ability to quickly and
completely relax, and so it doesn't fill adequately between contractions.
Elastic tissues, such as arteries and lungs, stiffen when they are over-
hydrated, losing their normal functions. In small blood vessels, swelling
narrows the channel, increasing resistance to the flow of blood.

When people force themselves to drink a certain amount of water every day,
even when they don't feel thirsty, they are activating complex adaptive
processes unnecessarily. Thirst is the best guide to the amount of fluid
needed.

When extra water consumption is combined with a low salt diet--as physicians
have so often recommended--a healthy person can adapt easily, but for a
hypothyroid person it can have disastrous effects.  

REFERENCES

Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1981 Jul;88(7):706-10. **Meteorological relations of
eclampsia in Lagos, Nigeria.** Agobe JT, Good W, Hancock KW. A retrospective
study of the meteorological relations of eclampsia in Lagos, Nigeria supports
other observations that the incidence of this disease varies significantly
with the weather **. Protective action by arid conditions is consistent with
the known effect of dehydration on convulsions of differing aetiologies and is
attributable to increased pulmonary transpirational water loss. Exacerbation
of eclampsia by cool, humid conditions** may therefore reflect excessive water
retention, due partly to suppressed pulmonary transpiration and partly to
kidney malfunction in those women.

Neuroendocrinology. 2001 Mar;73(3):185-93. **Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal
axis sensitization after chronic salt loading.** Amaya F, Tanaka M, Hayashi S,
Tanaka Y, Ibata Y.

Neuroscience. 1994 Sep;62(2):371-83. **Imaging cell volume changes and
neuronal excitation in the hippocampal slice.** Andrew RD, MacVicar BA.
**"Brain cell swelling is a consequence of seizure, ischemia or
excitotoxicity."**

Probl Endokrinol (Mosk). 1981 Sep-Oct;27(5):42-5. **[Sex and age differences
in the peripheral blood aldosterone levels]** Bekker VI, Svechnikova NV. **"An
increase in the blood aldosterone content in menopause appears to be due to
the hyperestrogenic phase (the first menopausal phase in women) and estrogen-
stimulated aldosterone synthesis.** Sexual differences in aldosterone
secretion disappear with age. Aldosterone content is significantly lower in
males and females, age over 80 years, than that in younger subjects, and
sexual differences are absent."

J Appl Physiol. 2002 May;92(5):1911-22. **Prolonged hypobaric hypoxemia
attenuates vasopressin secretion and renal response to osmostimulation in
men.** Bestle MH, Olsen NV, Poulsen TD, Roach R, Fogh-Andersen N, Bie P. "In
conclusion, chronic hypobaric hypoxemia **1) elevates the set point of plasma
osmolality-to-plasma vasopressin relationship, possibly because of concurrent
hypertension, thereby causing hypovolemia and hyperosmolality, and 2) blunts
the natriuretic response to hypertonic volume expansion . . . ."**

Metabolism. 1999 Apr;48(4):472-6. **Effects of hypoosmolality on whole-body
lipolysis in man.** Bilz S, Ninnis R, Keller U.

JAMA. 1984 Jul 27;252(4):524-6. **Impaired osmoregulation at high altitude.
Studies on Mt Everest.** Blume FD, Boyer SJ, Braverman LE, Cohen A, Dirkse J,
Mordes JP.

Gerontology. 1996;42(4):229-34. **Effect of aging and sodium deprivation on
plasma concentration of aldosterone and on plasma renin activity in the rat.**
Brudieux R, Rakotondrazafy J.

Endocr Res. 1996 Nov;22(4):577-8. **The role of L-aromatic amino acid
decarboxylase in serotonin-stimulated aldosterone secretion in response to
salt intake.** Burns N, Brett L, Olverman HJ, Nagatsu T, Lee MR, Williams BC.

Curr Drug Targets Immune Endocr Metabol Disord. 2004 Mar;4(1):1-10.
**Melatonin role in experimental arthritis.** Cardinali DP, Garcia AP, Cano P,
Esquifino AI.

J Lipid Res. 2003 Apr;44(4):727-32. Epub 2003 Jan 16. **Dietary sodium
chloride restriction enhances aortic wall lipid storage and raises plasma
lipid concentration in LDL receptor knockout mice.** Catanozi S, Rocha JC,
Passarelli M, Guzzo ML, Alves C, Furukawa LN, Nunes VS, Nakandakare ER,
Heimann JC, Quintao EC. **"Arterial fat storage correlated with NEFA
concentrations in the LDLR KO mice alone (n = 14, P = 0.0065). Thus, dietary
sodium chloride restriction enhances aortic wall lipid storage in moderately
hyperlipidemic mice."**

Am J Physiol. 1978 Mar;234(3):F235-7. **Acetazolamide and renal
ammoniagenesis.** Chapman SK, Hoover MS.

Early Hum Dev. 1989 Jun;19(3):191-8. **Muscle cell potassium, RNA and
hydration in pregnancy and pre-eclampsia.** Cheek DB, Petrucco OM, Gillespie
A, Green RC, Ness D, Dalton M. "Thirty four pregnant women from 26 to 38 weeks
gestation and 24 pregnant women with pre-eclampsia gave samples of muscle
(rectus abdominis) at caesarean section." " **From 26 to 38 weeks gestation
the concentration of K+ per litre of cell water ([Ki]) slowly declined."**
"Since other cations per litre of muscle cell water did not change, questions
are raised. is the cation gap filled by amino acids or does vascular spasm
cause a leakage of K+ from muscle cells? **Does hypotonicity eventually
develop leading to water intoxication? The low oncotic pressure in pre-
eclampsia (shown here), the negative free water clearance could all favour
increased cell hydration (some evidence for this is presented here towards
term).** Assessment of available information concerning creatinine excretion .
. . **leads us to believe that a significant increase in muscle mass
occurs...."**

Autoimmun Rev. 2005 Nov;4(8):497-502. **Altered circadian rhythms in
rheumatoid arthritis patients play a role in the disease's symptoms.** Cutolo
M, Villaggio B, Otsa K, Aakre O, Sulli A, Seriolo B.

Eur J Pharmacol. 1979 Oct 15;58(4):425-31. **Antiulcer activity of hypertonic
solutions in the rat: possible role of prostaglandins.** Danon A, Assouline G.

Peptides. 1990 Jan-Feb;11(1):59-63. **Long-term salt loading impairs pituitary
responsiveness to ACTH secretagogues and stress in rats.** Dohanics J, Kovacs
KJ, Folly G, Makara GB.

Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 1982 Mar;60(3):331-4. **Role of acidosis in the
protein wasting of fasting in the rat and the rabbit.** Hannaford MC,
Goldstein MB, Josse RG, Halperin ML. "Therefore, it appears that if more
nitrogen is excreted as ammonium, net protein breakdown increases to furnish
the substrate for ammoniagenesis...."

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2004 Sep;28(5):507-24. **The role of norepinephrine in
epilepsy: from the bench to the bedside.** Giorgi FS, Pizzanelli C, Biagioni
F, Murri L, Fornai F.

Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 1998 Dec;76(12):1120-31. **Bulbospinal serotonergic
activity during changes in thyroid status.** Henley WN, Bellush LL, Tressler
M.

Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1991 Jun;10(3):251-8. **Benzamide derivatives provide
evidence for the involvement of a 5-HT4 receptor type in the mechanism of
action of serotonin in frog adrenocortical cells.** Idres S, Delarue C,
Lefebvre H, Vaudry H. "We have previously shown that **serotonin (5-HT) is a
potent stimulator of corticosterone and aldosterone secretion by frog
adrenocortical cells and we have demonstrated that the action of 5-HT is not
mediated by the classical 5-HT receptor subtypes i.e. 5-HT1, 5-HT2 and
5-HT3."**

Nippon Rinsho. 1992 Sep;50(9):2124-8. **[Effects of pH on the endocrine system
and metabolism]** [Article in Japanese] Inoue Y, Kaneko T.
"6-phosphofructo-1-kinase, a rate limiting enzyme in glycolysis, seems to be
activated directly by a rise in pH. Alkalosis stimulates the production of
pyruvic acid and lactic acid."

Am J Physiol. 1997 Jul;273(1 Pt 2):H104-12. **Endothelial ATP-sensitive
potassium channels mediate coronary microvascular dilation to
hyperosmolarity.** Ishizaka H, Kuo L.

Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2001 Oct;281(4):C1403-7. **Hypotonicity induces
L-selectin shedding in human neutrophils.** Kaba NK, Knauf PA. ****

Ross Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 2003 Feb;89(2):146-53. [ **Effect of
melatonin on neurogenic vasoreactivity: formation and modulation of the vessel
response]** Karachentseva OV, Iartsev VN, Dvoretskii DP, Zhdanova IV.

J Investig Med. 2002 Mar;50(2):101-9. **Stimulatory effects of
hyperprolactinemia on aldosterone secretion in ovariectomized rats.** Kau MM,
Chang LL, Kan SF, Ho LT, Wang PS.

Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jan 4;1426(1):17-31. **Effect of electric field on
physical states of cell-associated water in germinating morning glory seeds
observed by 1H-NMR.** Isobe S, Ishida N, Koizumi M, Kano H, Hazlewood CF.

Eur J Clin Nutr. 2003 Dec;57 Suppl 2:S69-74. **Effects of changes in hydration
on protein, glucose and lipid metabolism in man: impact on health.** Keller U,
Szinnai G, Bilz S, Berneis K. Alterations of cell volume induced by changes of
extracellular osmolality have been reported to regulate intracellular
metabolic pathways. Hypo-osmotic cell swelling counteracts proteolysis and
glycogen breakdown in the liver, whereas hyperosmotic cell shrinkage promotes
protein breakdown, glycolysis and glycogenolysis.

Ann Ophthalmol. 1977 Nov;9(11):1383-7. **The effect of hypertonic ointments on
corneal alkali burns.** Korey M, Peyman GA, Berkowitz R.

Horm Metab Res. 2005 Jul;37(7):455-9. **Aldosterone inhibits uncoupling
protein-1, induces insulin resistance, and stimulates proinflammatory
adipokines in adipocytes.** Kraus D, Jager J, Meier B, Fasshauer M, Klein J.

J Cell Physiol. 2003 Apr;195(1):61-9. **Control of hepatocyte DNA synthesis by
intracellular pH and its role in the action of tumor promoters.** Lee CH,
Cragoe EJ Jr, Edwards AM.

**[www.gilbertling.org](http://www.gilbertling.org)**

Acta Endocrinol (Copenh). 1977 Sep;86(1):81-8. **Studies on circadian
variations of plasma TSH, thyroxine and triiodothyronine in man.** Lucke C,
Hehrmann R, von Mayersbach K, von zur Muhlen A.

Adv Neurol. 1986;44:619-39. **Ionic changes and alterations in the size of the
extracellular space during epileptic activity.** Lux HD, Heinemann U, Dietzel
I.

J Pediatr. 2002 Oct;141(4):587-92. **The most essential nutrient: defining the
adequate intake of water.** Manz F, Wentz A, Sichert-Hellert W.

Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1995 Feb;24(4):282-90. **Bone and joint manifestations
of hypothyroidism.** McLean RM, Podell DN.

Clin Invest Med. 1997 Feb;20(1):16-24. **Effective water clearance and
tonicity balance: the excretion of water revisited.** Mallie JP, Bichet DG,
Halperin ML. "OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate (1) **that hyponatremia is usually due
to an inappropriately low rate of excretion of electrolyte-free water and (2)
that the measure "effective water clearance" (EWC** ) provides better
information about renal defence of the body tonicity than does the classic
measure free-water clearance, and to provide the rationale for calculating a
"tonicity balance," which involves using water and sodium plus potassium
intakes and their renal excretion to reveal the basis for changes in body
tonicity." "The water load was excreted rapidly by normals, more slowly by
patients with CHF, and not at all by patients with SIADH."

FEBS Lett. 2000 Jan 7;465(1):64-8. **Hypoosmolarity influences the activity of
transcription factor NF-kappaB in rat H4IIE hepatoma cells.** Michalke M,
Cariers A, Schliess F, Haussinger D.

Steroids. 2005 May-Jun;70(5-7):347-51. **Nongenomic effects of
mineralocorticoid receptor activation in the cardiovascular system.**
Mihailidou AS, Funder JW. "Alzamora et al. showed 11beta-hydroxysteroid
denydrogenase 1 and 2 (11betaHSD1, 11betaHSD2) expression in human vascular
**smooth muscle cells, and that aldosterone rapidly raises intracellular pH
via sodium-hydrogen exchange; cortisol is without effect and spironolactone
does not block the aldosterone response."**

Epilepsy Res. 1988 Mar-Apr;2(2):102-10. **Evidence of hypothyroidism in the
genetically epilepsy-prone rat.** Mills SA, Savage DD.

Cell Biol Int. 2005 Apr;29(4):261-8. **Down-regulation of immediate early gene
egr-1 expression in rat C6 glioma cells by short-term exposure to high salt
culture medium.** Morita K, Arimochi H, Yoshida S.

BMC Psychiatry. 2003 Oct 29;3:15. **The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
in patients with depression compared to controls--a sleep endocrine study.**
Murck H, Held K, Ziegenbein M, Kunzel H, Koch K, Steiger A.

Physiol Behav. 1996 Jan;59(1):133-9. **Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
alter body temperature and suppress melatonin in humans.** Murphy PJ, Myers
BL, Badia P.

Probl Endokrinol (Mosk). 1987 Jan-Feb;33(1):18-21. **[Characteristics of the
hydration status of patients with hypothyroidism** ] Nazarov AN, Lobachik VI,
Zhidkov VV, Borisov GI, Abrosimov SV.

Pflugers Arch. 1991 Oct;419(3-4):418-20. **Alkaline stress transforms Madin-
Darby canine kidney cells.** Oberleithner H, Westphale HJ, Gassner B. "Similar
to growth factors aldosterone stimulates Na+/H+ exchange in renal target cells
leading to cytoplasmic alkalinization. An alkaline intracellular pH reduces
the H+ bonds between repressor proteins and DNA leading to the destabilization
of the nuclear chromatin. **We observed that sustained alkaline stress "per
se" can lead to malignant transformation of Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK)
cells."**

Clin Nephrol. 1976 Sep;6(3):404-13. **On the pathogenesis of Bartter's
syndrome: report of studies in a patient with this disorder.** Norby L, Mark
AL, Kaloyanides GJ. "During aminoglutethimide inhibition of aldosterone
synthesis the subject was able to maintain potassium balance at a normal serum
potassium concentration on a potassium intake of 130 mEq/day which suggests
that aldosterone is the major cause of the potassium wasting...."

Am J Vet Res. 1978 Jan;39(1):159-61. **Effect of thyroid state on magnesium
concentration of rat tissues.** Oliver JW.

Surg. Gynec. Obst. 52, 941 (May), 1931. **[Hypertonic saline and
peristalsis]** Orr, FG, Johnstone, PN, and Haden, RL.

Metabolism. 2004 Mar;53(3):278-9. **Treating hypothyroidism improves
endothelial function.** Papaioannou GI, Lagasse M, Mather JF, Thompson PD.

Am J Hypertens. 1999 Dec;12(12 Pt 1-2):1217-24. **Modification of
intracellular calcium and plasma renin by dietary calcium in men.** Petrov V,
Lijnen P.

J Biol Chem. 1991 Apr 5;266(10):6142-51. **An early enlargement of the
putrescine pool is required for growth in L1210 mouse leukemia cells under
hypoosmotic stress.** Poulin R, Wechter RS, Pegg AE.

J Exp Zool. 1985 Aug;235(2):187-96. **Plasma and pituitary prolactin levels in
rainbow trout during adaptation to different salinities.** Prunet P, Boeuf G,
Houdebine LM.

J Physiol. 1975 Jan;244(2):303-12. **The relationship between elevated water
intake and oedema associated with congestive cardiac failure in the dog.**
Ramsay DJ, Rolls BJ, Wood RJ. " **These results suggest that increased fluid
intake is probably important in the aetiology of the oedema associated with
congestive cardiac failure,** probably through the renin-angiotensin system."

Br J Pharmacol. 1999 Aug;127(7):1666-70. **Effects of melatonin on rat pial
arteriolar diameter in vivo.** Regrigny O, Delagrange P, Scalbert E, Lartaud-
Idjouadiene I, Atkinson J, Chillon JM. "Based on our finding that melatonin
decreased the lower limit of cerebral blood flow autoregulation in rat, we
previously suggested that melatonin constricts cerebral arterioles."
"Melatonin induced a dose-dependent constriction with an EC50 of 3.0+/-0.1 nM
and a maximal constriction of -15+/(-1%)." "Melatonin directly constricts
small diameter cerebral arterioles in rats. This vasoconstrictor effect is
mediated by inhibition of BKCa channels following activation of mt1 and/or MT2
receptors."

Magn Reson Med. 2000 Dec;44(6):884-92. **Diffusion tensor MRI of the spinal
cord.** Ries M, Jones RA, Dousset V, Moonen CT.

Am J Med Sci. 2005 Jul;330(1):1-7. **Bone loss in rats with aldosteronism.**
Runyan AL, Chhokar VS, Sun Y, Bhattacharya SK, Runyan JW, Weber KT. "We
hypothesized that aldosteronism is accompanied by hypercalciuria and
hypermagnesuria that lead to bone loss, which could be rescued by
hydrochlorothiazide and spironolactone."

Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1991 May;82(2):184-91. **Kinetic studies of growth
hormone and prolactin during adaptation of coho salmon, Oncorhynchus kisutch,
to different salinities.** Sakamoto T, Iwata M, Hirano T.

Am J Hypertens. 2005 Jan;18(1):44-9. **Antiproteinuric effects of
mineralocorticoid receptor blockade in patients with chronic renal disease.**
Sato A, Hayashi K, Saruta T.

Int Rev Cytol. 2003;225:187-228. **Call volume and insulin signaling.**
Schliess F, Haussinger D. " **In general an increase in cell hydration
stimulates anabolic metabolism and proliferation** and provides
cytoprotection, whereas cellular dehydration leads to a catabolic situation
and sensitizes cells to apoptotic stimuli."

Med Klin (Munich). 2002 Aug 15;97(8):484-7. **[Hypo-osmolar hyponatremia as
the chief symptom in hypothyroidism]** [Article in German] Schmitt R, Dittrich
AM, Groneberg D, Griethe W.

Physiol Bohemoslov. 1977;26(5):385-95. **Antioestrogenic action of the
aldosterone antagonist canrenoate K in the rat (adenohypophysis,
ceruloplasmin).** Schreiber V, Pribyl T.

Epilepsy Res. 1998 Sep;32(1-2):275-85. **Osmolarity, ionic flux, and changes
in brain excitability.** Schwartzkroin PA, Baraban SC, Hochman DW.

D. Shanklin and J. Hodin, **_Maternal Nutrition and Child Health,_ CC**
Thomas, 1979.

Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2000;100(8):4-9. **[On myotonia
doctrine. Myotonia in myxedema patients.** 1903] Shmidt AN.

Pathol Microbiol (Basel). 1974;41(1):11-25. **Response of vertebral cartilage
and bone to hormonal imbalances produced by anterior hypophyseal hormones and
hypothyroidism.** Silberberg R.

J Physiol. 1978 Jan;274:447-54. **Aldosterone effects on renal metabolism.**
Snart RS, Taylor E.

J Neuroendocrinol. 2004 May;16(5):472-82. **Modulation of oestrogen receptor-
beta mRNA expression in rat paraventricular and supraoptic nucleus neurones
following adrenal steroid manipulation and hyperosmotic stimulation.**
Somponpun SJ, Holmes MC, Seckl JR, Russell JA.

**J Membr Biol. 1985;83(1-2):25-37. Cellular mechanism of HCO-3 and Cl-
transport in insect salt gland.** Strange K, Phillips JE.

J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Sep;112(3):513-7. **Elevated serum melatonin is
associated with the nocturnal worsening of asthma.** Sutherland ER, Ellison
MC, Kraft M, Martin RJ.

Am J Physiol. 1997 Jul;273(1 Pt 2):R423-32. **NaCl ingestion ameliorates
plasma indexes of calcium deficiency.** Tordoff MG.

J Neurophysiol. 1989 May;61(5):927-38. **Role of extracellular space in
hyperosmotic suppression of potassium-induced electrographic seizures.**
Traynelis SF, Dingledine R.

Neuroradiology. 2003 Feb;45(2):90-4. Epub 2003 Jan 15. **Diffusion-weighted
MRI of the cervical spinal cord using a single-shot fast spin-echo technique:
findings in normal subjects and in myelomalacia.** Tsuchiya K, Katase S,
Fujikawa A, Hachiya J, Kanazawa H, Yodo K.

Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):H420-5. **Melatonin
potentiates NE-induced vasoconstriction without augmenting cytosolic calcium
concentration.** Vandeputte C, Giummelly P, Atkinson J, Delagrange P, Scalbert
E, Capdeville-Atkinson C.

Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2004 Jul;1(2):51-6. **Efficacy of aldosterone receptor
antagonism in heart failure: potential mechanisms.** Weber KT. "As a
circulating hormone, aldosterone has well-known endocrine **** properties that
contribute to the pathophysiology of congestive heart failure. This includes
Na+ resorption at the expense of K+ excretion in such tissues as kidneys,
colon, sweat, and salivary glands. **** Mg2+ excretion at these sites is
likewise enhanced by aldosterone, whereas adrenal aldosterone secretion is
regulated by extracellular Mg2+." **"De novo generation of aldosterone within
the cardiovasculature is recognized** and findings suggest its auto/paracrine
properties contribute to tissue repair. Each of these actions is interrupted
by aldosterone receptor antagonism and therefore may contribute to its
salutary response in heart failure."

Am J Physiol. 1977 Jul;233(1):E56-60. **Influence of aldosterone on renal
ammonia production.** Welbourne TC, Francoeur D.

Endocr J. 2004 Apr;51(2):243-51. **Aldosterone** **stimulates gene expression
of hepatic gluconeogenic enzymes through the glucocorticoid receptor in a
manner independent of the protein kinase B cascade.** Yamashita R, Kikuchi T,
Mori Y, Aoki K, Kaburagi Y, Yasuda K, Sekihara H. "Primary aldosteronism is
associated with glucose intolerance and diabetes, which is due in part to
impaired insulin release caused by reduction of potassium, although other
possibilities remain to be elucidated."

Hypertens Res. 2005 May;28(5):447-55. **Excess aldosterone under normal salt
diet induces cardiac hypertrophy and infiltration via oxidative stress.**
Yoshida K, Kim-Mitsuyama S, Wake R, Izumiya Y, Izumi Y, Yukimura T, Ueda M,
Yoshiyama M, Iwao H.

Cytobios. 1986;45(180):25-34. **Regulation of ODC activity in the thymus and
liver of rats by adrenal hormones.** Zahner SL, Prahlad KV, Mitchell JL.

J Clin Lab Anal 1998;12(3):145-9. **A proposal for standardizing urine
collections for bone resorption markers measurement.** Zaninotto M, Bernardi
D, Ujka F, Bonato P, Plebani M

1991 Dec;261(6 Pt 2):R1424-30. **Low salt mimics effects of dark pulses on
circadian pacemaker in cultured chick pineal cells.** Zatz M,

Am J Physiol. 1991 Dec;261(6 Pt 2):R1424-30. **Low salt mimics effects of dark
pulses on circadian pacemaker in cultured chick pineal cells.** Zatz M, Wang
HM.

Brain Res. 1989 Oct 30;501(1):37-45. **Ouabain (or salt solution lacking
potassium) mimics the effects of dark pulses on the circadian pacemaker in
cultured chick pineal cells.** Zatz M, Mullen DA.  

© Ray Peat Ph.D. 2009. All Rights Reserved. www.RayPeat.com  
  
  
^^^ Top ^^^  
  

