Wecarethatyourpatientsgetwell.
FotaFREEcalalogplea"caM:
ToIIr..ItIMllsou,; 800-392·9OJ9 Outsl(l,"l,nolll; 80().325.9592THEKEYCO.
FINESTHEALTH PRODUCTS
Catering specifically tothe
Professional witha"preventive" or
"holistic" healthcarepractice.
Fromawidevarietyatservices
andproducts, IheKeyCompany is
uniqueandable10meettheneeds
atmostprofessional practices.
Ourproductline(over500items)
includes supplements whichare
hypo-allergenic.
Ifyouarelookingforproductintegrityand
costeffectivetherapies, pleaseconsider
whattheKeyCompany hastooffer.
~Inowhaveafulfillmentofwhat Ihave
beenwantingtodoforsometime,and that
istooperate aself-help infonnation service,
holdself-help seminars onmagnetic
therapyandengageinreseaKh inmedical
magnetics. Isupervise somepatients
undergoing diagnosis andtreatment at
American Biologics-Mexico inTijuana,
Mexico.American Biologics-Mexico isan
excellent research institution whereIcan
reachmyresearch goals.
Ihavedecideditdoesn'tpaytogive
creditadjustments topatients. Ifound
..thatIhadcreditedanexcessof$300,000
andthenoneofthesecomplained tothe
medicallicenseboardbecauseshedidnot
wanttopayherbill.Iwonderifweare
entering anewdayinwhichinsurance
companies aregoingtoromplaintomedical
licenseboardsbecausetheydonotwantto
payforaparticular service.Ial80wonder
ifdoctorsnowaregoingtobecomplaining
whenapatientleavesthemandgoesto
anotherdoctor,whodoesmorethanusual
andcustomary inordertohelphispatients.
Ihaveenjoyedthepracticeofmedicine and
partofmyjoyhasbeenbec:ause Ihave
soughtoutthoseextrawaystohelpmy
patients. Myallergyworkwasguidedbya
boardcertified allergist. Ihaveworked
closelywithbiochemists foryean.The
addition ofbiophysics tomypracticehas
beenonahighscientific level.Itseems
quiteevident, however, thataphysician
canspendalotofmoney justbecauseheis
difTerentandjust becausehewantstohelp
hispatients whohavenotbeenhelpedby
whattheaverage physician provides.
WilliamH.Philpott, M_D.
17171S.E.29th
Choctaw, Oklahoma 73020
405-390-3009
Biological BalanceandAddictions
Editor.
Agoodsalesman knowshowtogetonto
wavesofrisingenthusiasm. Intuitively,
politicians, cultleaders,andscientists use
thesameprocess. Thequickrewards of
joining arisingtidereinforce the
confonnists' efforts,andthought needn't
gomuchbeyond"'thismustbe true,bec:ause
itworksforme."
Intheearly1950's,DavidReisman
discussedtheideaofcounter.cyclic activity
ineconomics andculture, asanerror­
balancing technique. Oneofthesimplest
waystoevaluate themeaning ofacyclic
processistoseewhathappens ifitis
To-.end LetterforDoctonJune1991dampedoropposed, andtocompare these
resultswithanaltemative amplification
orreinforcement_ Thetechnique isuseful
biologically, aswellassocially:
phannacologists haveusedthemethodfor
centuries, andtheories ofmedicine are
basedoneitherdamping orintensifying
thewave-like processes.
Withdrawal fromanaddictive
substance involves aphysiological swing
toakindof-opposite pole,"ornadirtothe
zenithofthedrug'sllction. AJJnodrughas
justoneeffect,thedeformation of
physiology remaining whenthedrugis
removed willnotbeasimplematterofa
single"receptor- molecule. Physiology
compensates continuously tomaintain
balanced functioning inthepresence ofa
greatvarietyofdrug-like substances in
ourdiet.Whenthedietischanged
suddenly, eliminating alcohol.orcaffeine
orotherbiologically activesubstances. our
compensatory counter-cyclic adjustment
isrevealed.
Theretum toaphysiologicallybe.lanced
staterequires manychanges, andthese
occuratdifferent rates.(Thephysiology
involved inanyorganismic function
consistsofoverlappinglayers,eachofwhich
canworkalonetosomeexent,anddysadaptation canaffectthedifferent
layers-e.g.,hormonal andneural· in
different ways.Andwithinagiven
regulatory "Iayer,-suchastheautonomic
nervoussystem,therearevariouskindsof
adaptive processes. including adjustment
ofenergycharge,rateof"firing,"thTMhoIda,
synthesis, andgrowth.)
Itisimportant tothinkconcretely about
theprocesses in"recompensation- or
restoration ofbalance. Someofthe
processes weshouldconsider inrelationto
addiction are:tissueenergycharge,
metabolic detoxication andelimination,
permeability andbarrier functions,
excitation-inhibition, andpoorly
compensated stressreactions.
Probeblythebiggesterrorinourpopular
cultureofaddiction istheideathatcraving
istriggeredbythepresence ofthesubstaru:e
inthebody,andthatcleansing the
substance fromthebodywillstopthe
craving.Thisideahasbecomequiteacult,
withramifications intotheoriesofobesity,
allergy,sexualdependenq', andviolence.
Thecommon element inthesewidely
promoted cultishsystems isadistrustof
~
~
theorganilJlD. abody-rejecting attitude
thatcravingisnecessarily bad,leadingto
ablurringofthedifference between need
andaddiction. Cleansing theoffending
substance fromthebodytostopthecraving
suggeststhatthecleanandpurepenlOnis
without desires. Opposing thisother­
worldlydoctrine isthefactthatdesires
reflectneeds,thoughseldominafully
rational way.Theractthatsomething
makesyoufeelbetter,andthatyoufeel
worsewhenyoustopusingit,shouldn't be
taken 8Sevidence ofits"addictiveness,"
butmanypeoplefeelthatwayaboutthyroid
hormone, coffee,vitamins, andeventhe
mostordinary foods.
Theractthatatasteofchocolate can
provokeawildlustformorechocolate, or
thatonecigarette renewstheaddiction,
doesnotmeanthatthepresence of
chocolate ornicotineinthebloodc:reates 8
craving.Rather,itisthatanorganism in
anunstablestateperceives theavailability
ofsomething whichpromises topartially
restorethedesiredstability. Itisobvious
thatsmoking cigarettes isnotagoodway
toachievetheneededstability butthis
observation can'tbegeneralized tothe
cravingforpotatochips,orcoffee,orthe
multitudeofotherthingsthatpeopleoften
crave.Thereisoftenaneasilydiscovered
reasonforcravings, anditismorefruitful
tosuspectthatallcravings havearational
basisthantoaccepttheCalvinist or
Buddhist ideathatdesireitselfisbad.
Theavailability ofenergyiscentralto
ourstablefunctioning, andtheneedfor
energypowerfullymodifiesourfunctioning.
Forexample, ashungerincreases, the
brain'sinterpretive systemchanges ina
waythatcausesincreasingly unfamiliar
thingstobeconsidered aspossible food.
The"spreading excitation" thatleadsto
thisextended searchprobably occursin
relationtoneedsotherthanhunger,and
couldleadtoexperimentation withdrugs
andtootheractivities thatgivesome
indirect satisfaction. Obsessive and
compulsive patterns eansometimes be
resolved byassisting thebrain'senergy
metabolism, forexamplewithasupplement
ofmagnesium andthyroid.
Butevenhungeritselfhassuch
ramifications -proteindeficiency, salt
deficiency, hypoglycemia, elevated
adrenalin andcortisol andgrowth
hormone, forexample-thatagreat variety
ofthingscouldgivepartialsatisfaction.
Alcoholcanmakeapowerful andpositive
contribution tonutrition bysparingprotein,andbymodifyingnutrition-related
hormones. (Although lJOmeofthiswork
hasbeenpublished intheJ0lU7I41o(tke
Americon. MmicolAuociotwn.. thestigma
attached toalcoholhasprevented its
adoption asamostusefuldrug/nutrient,
evenintenninal cancerpatienta, whereits
promotion ofimmunity couldhavegreat
value.Theabusivestigmatizing ofuseful
substances isanexample ofunhealthily
exaggerated malcycles.)
Behindalcoholism, itiscommontofind
nutritional andendocrine problems, as
wellasemotional orsituational problems.
Forexample, amanwhohadbeenunhappy
withhisworkandhadstruggled with
"alcoholism" for13years,gavemethe
impression ofsomeone lackingthebasic
honnone precursor, pregnenolone. Afew
minutes afterhetook100mg.of
pregnenolone, hisdepression andanxiety
disappeared. Later,hesaid"that'sthe
feelingI'vebeentryingtogetfromalcohol,
butitneverworked." Pregnenolone, more
powerfully thanalcohol,lowerscortisol
whilestabilizingothersystems.Itshighest.
concentration inthebodyoccursint.he
brain,anditsleveldeclinessharplywith
aging:it.verylikelymakesalarge
contribution totheadaptivenessandsense
ofwell-being whicharecharacteristic of
healthy youngindividuals. Inhealthy
youngpeopleoranimals, additional
pregnenolone hasnodetectable effect.
-Agitated depression, -whichiscommon
inoldage,isacommon symptom of
withdrawal fromavarietyofaddictive
substances. Isuspect thatagitated
depression, oranxious depression, isa
stresssyndrome thatmakesordinary
adaptation difficult. Theinability tocope
witheveryday problems oftenprecedes
experimentation withdrugs.Lowenergy
andhighanxietycanleadapersontouse
eitherstimulants orsedatives, orboth.
Curingtheinitialproblem shouldmake
withdrawal frommanysubstances easier,
thoughmostofmyexperience relatingto
-addiction- haabeenwit.h"alcoholism."
In1979,tWQ.lthinking aboutsteroid
anesthesia, anddecided totest.whether
thenewlydiscovered ·opiatereceptors"
wereinvolved. Naloxone, theanti-opiate,
didn'tseemtoblockprogesterone
anesthesia, butIwasstillconvinced that
therewasaconnection. Ithinkof
progesterone asactingatadeeperormore
generallevel,whichcouldallowsynergism
betweenopiatesandprogesterone, without
naloxone's blocking theeffectof
progesterone.·
Bychance,amusician whosaidhehad
beenusingheroinandalcoholfor40yeanaskedifIcouldhelphimaoberupforan
important jobthat.wastobegininafew
days.Hesaidhehadbeencontinuously
drunkfor6weeks.Hebroughtaquartcl
beerwithhimwhenhecametothehouse,
andsincewewerehavingaholidaydinner,
hehadachancetokeepdrinking wine
whenhisbeerwasfinished. Atbedtime,I
toldhimaboutmyinconclusive
experiments withprogesterone, and
described theothereffectsofthematerial,
indudingitsbrain-quieting andanti·toxic,
anti-stress effects.Hetookabout100mg.
then(invitaminE),andtooktherestofthe
bottletobedwithhim.Sincehehadserious
cirrhosis oftheliver,Iexplained thathe
shouldalsotaketriiodothyronine, since
thisactiveformofthethyroidhormone is
formedmainlyin theliver,andIsuggested
thathisnearlydestroyed liverwasprobably
makingverylittle.
Hegotuparound8o'clockthenext
morning, andwassmilingandveryhappy
looking. Hesaidhehadneverhadthis
experience before,ofwakingupwithouta
hangover afterheavydrinking. Hehad
consumed somuchoftheprogesterone
thatIrepeatedly toldhimtobeawarethat
itcouldinterfere withhissexualfunction
byblocking theeffectsoftestoeterone. He
stayedalertand sober,and proceeded with
hisperformances. Hetookabout30gram.
ofprogesterone invitaminEoverthenext
several months, andsaidhissexual
functioning wasperfectly normal.Hetook
50meg.ofCytomel morning andnight,
andhisdoctongave himafewirUectionsof
magnesium. Hisdoctorsnoticedthathis
liverwasgettingsmaller,andaboutayear
andahalflatertheysaiditwasnormal,
withoutcirrhosis. (Sincethenotherpeople
havenoticedsimilareffectsoninflamed
andenlarged livers, whentaking
progesterone withvitaminEandthyroid.)
Bothprogesterone andtriiodothyronine
havethefunctionofincT"easingthe tissue's
energysupply,andinsuitable dosescan
haveasteadying, calmingeffect.While
manypeoplethinkofthyroid 88akindcl
stimulant. becauseitcancurethecomaor
lethargy ofmyxedema, thisisavery
misleading idea.Inhypothyroidism, the
brainexciting hormones adrenalin,
estrogen,andcortisol areusuallyelevated,
andthenerve-muscle relaxantmagnesium
i.low.Nonnal, deepsleepisrareina
hypothyroid person.Thecorrectdoseof
triiodothyronine (theactivethyroid
hormone) withmagnesium isareliable
treatment forinsomnia, cramps, and
anxiety, whether thesesymptoms are
causedbyfatigue, oraging,oralcohol
withdrawaL
Townsend Letter(orDoctorsJune1991
English,Danish, French, German,Dutch&Spanishreportsavailable
Highestdegreeofaccuracy, precision andsensitivity
ellALie.#05108MnCuAIIt'I",Raymond Peat,Ph.D.
Bio-Research forGlobalEvolution
P.O.Box3427
Eugene, Oregon97403
503-345-9855"Biological Balance andAddictions" W88
published inBlakeCollege NewBktter.
available bysubscription fromDr.
Raymond Peat,Ph.D.Reference
1.Rothwell, K,"Dose-related inhibition
ofchemical carcinogenesis inmouseskin
bycaffeine," Nature252,69,1974.
lepMULTI-ELEMENTAL ANALYSIS of27Elements including
Arsenic,Barium,Beryllium, Boron,Germanium, Lithium,Vanadium
WholeBlood,Serum,Plasma,RBC
Hair,Urine,andWater
Comprehensive 40·Amlno AcidPanel
20-Amlno AcidNeurotransmitter PanelNotes:
·Thesystemswhichrespondtovalium
andatropine aretheplacesthatIwould
wanttolookforcluestoprogesterone's
effectsonaddiction.
Weexpanded ourservicestoserveyouevenbettercanhelptoremovesomeoftheunnecessary
guiltandanxiety8880ciated withaddiction.
Thismakesiteasiertofindoutwhatis
reallyneededtomovetowardastableand
balanced physiological state.Assimpleas
itistorecognize addiction asaprocessof
biological adaptation, therearemanytricks
forevaluating andfacilitating theprocess,
thatcanbediscussed inmoredetaillater.
PaintersandmuBicianshavesometimes
saidthattheyusealcoholorotherdrugsto
helpthemfindtheir"ownway.-Moving
againstthetideoftheculture isanadaptive
effort,andtheyfindsomeneurological
support indrugs.Theyarerightin
struggling againstthecurrentofimbecile
conformity tofindsomecreativetruth,but
therearebetterwaystosustainourenergy
andadaptive capacity. Insomecases,good
foodandsocialfairness areenoughto
enliven peoplesothatdrugsarenot
attractive, andinothercasesamorespecific
biochemical/energetic approach isneeded.
TRACEMINERALS INTERNATIONAL, INC.
2618Valmont
BOUlder, Colorado 80304-2904
Phone:(303)442-1082
Facsimile: (303)449-8767Aging,stress,andheavyconsumption
ofalcoholincreasethepermeability ofthe
intestine, causingincreased absorption of
microbial toxins.Laxatives, carrotfiber
(notcarrotjuice),activated charcoal, anda
smallamount ofsodium thiosulfate
decrease theformation andabsorption of
toxins,increasing theorganism's adaptive
capacity. Belladonna canimprove the
bowel'sfunctioniftherearespasmsduring
drugwithdrawal.
Camphor, adamantanamine
(amantadine, Symmetrel), and"'local­
anesthetics takensystemically, canhelp
inwithdrawal fromstimulants. The
conventional (200mg.)doseofcamphor
andadamantanamine shouldn't be
exceeded. (Thehormones thyroid,
progesterone andpregnenolone aloneare
sometimes enough.)
Smoking isprobably thehardest
addiction tobreak,butcarefuluseof
nicotine gumwithbelladonna (toblock
someofthecirculatory effectsofnicotine)
canallowapersontoavoidtheworst
toxinsofthesmokewhileovercoming the
behavioral habitofhandling cigarettes,
withouthavingtosimultaneously modify
thechemical addiction. Caffeineland
vitamin Aareveryprotective against
cancers,ineludingthoseinducedbysmoke.rp""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""~ Progesterone andpregnenolone bothhave
anti-toxic (or"catatoxic") effects,though
theireffectsonnicotinecravingareslight.
Oursociety's mystique aboutdrugs
makesithardforpeopletorelyontheir
ownjudgmentandexperience. Iftheywant
totrytofeelbetter,aspirin,coffee,tobacco
andalcoholarenormally theonlydrugs
theyhavetoexperiment with.Toomany
physicians thinkof"euphoria" asan
undesirable side-effect ofcertaindrugs,
andarelikelyeithertorecommend
stoicism, ortomechanically prescribe one
ofthestandard moodaltering drugs.
Ideally, aphysician should view
unhappiness andthefeelingthatlifeis
gettingtoohardtohandle,asabiological
problem tobeexplored incooperation with
thepatient. Ifcircumstances are
responsible, andcanbechanged, the
biologywilltakecareofitself.
Theinstitutions andcultsthathave
grownuparound"treating addiction- are
notsodifferent fromthecultsand
institutions(ineluwngthephannaceu tical
industry) thatsurround theuseofdrugs.
Rationality andconcernforthefullrange
ofrealneedsofpeoplearelikelytobe
ignoredwhenstereotypes andideologies
canbeusedsoprofitably.
Dealing withaddictions ashaving
(directlyorinwrectly)todowith realneeds
ownsend LetwrforDoctorsJune1991 453
