CO,H CHJ CO,H
I I I©o CH,-CH -NH-vCH-NH-CH-CH,rjQ)
H Htreatment regimenhasbeenpublished
inAduances inTherapy, (July/August
1990;7(4); 206-28J.
5.Recently, theCDC(CenterforDisease
Control)hasidentified peak97,(orpeak
E)asDi-L-tryptophan aminalof
acetaldehyde (seebelow).Although
peakEwasassociated withEMS,
research continues todetermine ifthis
substance (represented bypeakE)is
theactualcontaminant_ lMMlVR,
August1990;39(34);589-91 J
SomeFinalNotes
•L-tryptophan hasbeenusedinresearch
withoutseriousside-effec:t.s forover30
years.
•Itisanestablished factthatthereisno
association between Tysonand
Integrated Healthproducts andthe
disorder EMS.TysonandAssociates
hashaditsL-tryptophan analyzed by
numerous laboratories andno
contamination hasbeenfoundinany
Glycyrrhizin Supplementation
Benefited byMethionine
Administration
Editor.
Ireadwithinterest PaulBergner's
article onJapanese research on
glycyrrhizin andthepotential usefulness
oflicoriceroot(Glycyrrhiza glabm)for
thosewithAIDSorARCorwhoareHIV
positive.Aswithitsotherapplications, the
utilization oflicoricehereislimitedby
glycyrThizin's mineral corticoid activity
whichcausesexcretion ofpotassium and
retention ofsodium, therebyincreasing
fluidvolumeandbloodpressure withlong
termuse.Iwouldliketobringtoyour
readers'attention aJapanese studybyT.
Morletal.published inO)OYaku.rt'34:293­
301(1987)(EnglishabstractfoundinCMm.
Abs.108;49307t) whichtestedboth
methionine andaminoaceticacidalone
andincombination inratsasameansof
blocking thesesideeffectsofglycyrrhizin.
142TysonorIntegrated Health L­
tryptophan product.
•HPLC(HighPerformance Liquid
Chromatography) analysisoftheShowa
Denkofinished product(tablets) and
rawmaterial areonfileatTysonand
Associates, Inc.Thisanalysis showed
thesametypeofdatathatwaspublished
intheNewEngland Jou.rnal of
Medicine, [August 9.1990;323, (6»),
whichdemonstrated manyunidentified
peaksinaddition toL-tryptophan .
•Again,wewanttoaffirmthatpureL­
tryptophan issafeatthenormaldosage
of500mgto3000mgtakendailywith
theproperc:o-factors_
Thankyouforyoursupportinthepast
andwewillcontinue toinformyouofany
newdevelopments.
DonTyson,Chairman oftheBoord
Tyson&Associates
12832SouthChadron Avenue
Hawthorne, California 90250
213-675-1080
800-433-9750 California
800-367·7744 National
Theyfoundthatbothsubstances
individually ortogether, whengivenwith
glycyrrhizin, helpedprevent thefluid
retention byincreasing sodiumexcretion
andurinevolume.SinceDL-methionine
hasbeenusedinanumberoflipotropic
formulations atapproximately 1gram!
dayforsometime,thissupplemental use
isapparently safe.Ifi~usewith
Glycyrrhiza issuccessful inpreventing
thedevelopment ofhypokalemia and
hypertension inhumans, thenthebenefits
fromthisplantcanbeextended beyond
theircurrentlimits.
FrancisBrinker, N.D.
6417E.HayneStreet
Tucson,Arizona85710BowelToxinsAccelerate Aging
Process
Editor:
Thegerontologist, V.V.Frolkis,recently
foundthatmicelived43%longerthan
animals onthestandard dietwhenthey
periodically hadactivated charcoal added
totheirfood.Thisistheclearestevidence
Ihaveseenthat-OOweltoxins·makea
majorcontribution totheagingprocess.
Although Ithinkcarrotfiberwouldhavea
similareffect,theremightbeimportant
differences inthesubstances boundbywet
cellulose andbymicroporous carbon.
Analysis ofthesubstances boundtothe
charcoal afterithasbeenexcreted should
giveusimportant newknowledge about
aging.Besides endotoxin, Ithinkthe
charcoal mightprotectagainstmicrobial
estrogen andglucocorticoids, carbon
monoxide, cyanide, andunsaturated oils.
Absorption ofheavymetalsisprobably
decreased byalltypesof-fiber.·
WhileBogomoletz andMetehnikof saw
theboweltoxinsasthefactorwhichdrove
theagingprocess,Iseeboweltoxinsrather
asarelatively late·acting factorthat
alXelerates aprocesswhichdevelops for
otherreasons_ Onceourdetoxifying
mechanisms begintofail,boweltoxins
passthebowelwithrelative ease,and
rapidlydestroytheremaining systemsof
defenseanddetoxification. Thealtered
hormonal environment andweakened
digestion ofanagingorganism createa
newbalancebetween theanimalandthe
bowelflora,sometimes allowing the
proliferation ofmoretoxicflora_The
accumulation ofironandotherheavy
metals,andofunsaturated fats,andthe
progressive lossofcopperunderthe
influence ofthestressofdarkness, are
probably thecentraleventsintheprocess
ofaging.
RayPeat
P.O.Box3427
Eugene,Oregon97403•
Townsend LetterforDoctoMlFebrunry/March 1991
