oflaterstagesofthedisease) comeinto
view,thehirherpotencies arerequired.
Generally speaking, diseases
characterized bydiminished vitalaction
requirelowerpotencies, whilediseases
characterized byincreased vitalaction
respond bettertohigherpotencies, but
thisagainismodified bythetemperament
andconstitution ofthepatient.
Ifthegradeofthediseaseielowand
thepowerofreaction ielow,theremedy
mustbegivenlow.Incurable ortenninal
conditions, whenthepatientdoesnot
respondtowellselected remedies, norto
intercurrent reaction remediu, givenin
potenti:red formandsmalldose8,require
UIItoresorttothecrudemedici.ne and
increasethequantityofthedoseuptothe
pointofre8ction: whenreasonably sureof
theremedy,givethemothertincture or
alowtrituration, firstinmoderate, then
inincreasing dosesuntilthedosageis
foundtowhichthepatientwillreact-the
'maximum dose'maysometimes bethe
minimum. do«I1«Usary tobringabout
reaction. Thisdoesnotintheleastdegree
violatetheprinciple oftheminimum dose
ins~hcases:theprinciple ofsimilarsas
appliedintheeelectionofboth remedYClnd
doseiseternally anduniversally true.It
isastrueintencinal conditions inchronic
diseases marked bygrosspathological
lesions, 88itisinanyotherkindofease....
Thusthewholematterofthedose
resolves itselfintoaproblem of
individualization. Lookingatthissubject
broadlyandhavingthehighestdegreeof
successinview,itisseenthatitisas
necessary toindividualize thedoseasitis
theremedy,andthalthe wholescakof
potencies mustbeopentothe
prescriber!
HerbalExtract
MadefromfreshCarnivora plantsina
baseofgrainalcohol.
Forprofessional pricelistwrite:
VITALHEALTH
P.O.Box164
Muskego, WI53150
orcall
414·679·1846Wemustlearnhowtojudgethedegree
ofsusceptibility ifwewouldbesucceesful
homeopathic prescribers; andthisapplies
notonlytothenonnalsusceptibility of
thepatient asevidenced byhis
constitution, temperament, etc.buttothe
varying degreesofhissusceptibility as
modified bythecharacter andstagellof
hisdiseaseandbyprevious treatment. At
onestagehemayneedalowpotency,and
atanotherstage,ahighpotency.
Themanwhoconfines himeelf to
theuseofasinrlepotency, ortwoor
threepotencies, betheyloworhirh,
isnotavaiHne himself ofallthe
measures ofhi.artandwill
frequently foiltocure.
RichardL.FaIT
11952Cedar
Hawthorne, California 90250
BrainAging
Editor.
ElieMechnikov, likePavlov,builta
broadunderstanding ofthenatureof
animalsfromabasicstudyoftheprocess
ofnutrition. Hebelieved thatinthe
development ofanindividual, andin
evolution. thereiaanearlystageinwhich
•divisionoflaboroccurs,withsomecells
beingresponsible formovement, andother
cells(theamoeboid phagocytea) being
responsible foringesting anddigesting
food.Thenutritional functionathese
lattercellsWailthebamsforbuilding and
shapingduues,andasthecomplexity of
theorganism inC'Teased, thephagocytes
remained centralinthepreservation of
theintegrity oftheorganism.
Someexamples WIllillustrate theways
inwhichphagocytic whitebloodcells
preserve integrity.In.wound.,whitebl.ood
cellsarrivequickly. Foreignmatter,such
asbacteria, isingested anddestroyed.If
theobjectistoolargetoingest,thecells
adheretoit,andsealitoff.Otherwhite
bloodcellsparticipate inhealing, wound
closing,andscarformation. Damaged or
virus·infected cellsoftheorganism, or
cancercells,or"old'"redbloodcellsaredestroyed andremoved. Tissueremodeling
•rangingfromthetadpole's shrinking tail
tothereshaping ofbonebyosteoclasts -is
handled bythissortofcell.(Thatis,
removal, replacement, andalteration of
tissuearehandledbythissystem.)
Theenergyavailable tothewhitecells,
andthecondition ofthevarioustissue
cells,governtheprocesses ofphagocytosis,
healing, andtissueremodeling. Thyroid
hormone andbodytemperature are
import.ant factorsgoverning theactivity
ofwhitecells.Therateofmovement of
whitecellsthroughthetiesueisstrongly
dependent upontemperaturel(withthe
rateincreasing withanincrease in
temperature), andtheyaregenerally
tolerantofveryhightemperatures.1'The
conditiom; governing re80rption ofthe
tadJX>le'. tailareprobably relevant tohow
whitebloodcellsfunction inmammals.
Eithercoldorhypothyroidism tendsto
suppress ordelaythephagocytic activity
inthetadpole tail.Withanadequate
temperature andthyroidhonnone, the
cellsselectively removetheoldestcells
first,indicating thattheyrecognize
cellularage.
Although Mechnikov believedthatthe
phagocytes wereresponsible forthe
atrophy ofaging,healsobelieved that
bacterial toxinsfromtheintestine
dominated theagingproceu.
Bacterial endotoxin inhibits
mitochondrial respiration, andthis
re8piration isneeded forthe
intramitochondrial conversion of
cholesterol intopregnenolone. Withaging,
pregnenolone anditsderivatives,
progesterone andDHEA,declinesharply.
Thebrain,theorganwiththehighest
concentration ofthosestabilizing
substances, hasmanysystems for
adapting totheir decreasing
concentration, buttheimmune systemis
probably lelllabletocompensate forthose
agingchanges.
Thecombination ofanextreme
decrease inconcentration oftheprotective
steroids inthebrain,andimpaired
functionofthephagocytes, mightaccount
forsomeofthefeatures ofAlzheimer's
disease. Inthisdisease, microtubules
8ttumulate withinnervecellsandother
nervecensdie,leavingtanglesoftheir
axons,including microtubules. Thesecells
arenotremoved, asdeadcellsnormally
are.Subnormal temperature and
hypothyroidism probably contribute tothe
inertiaofthephagocytes. (Inmammalian
cells,microtubules dilSolve atlow
temperatures, andarestableathigherI
I
I
I
738 Townsend Letler(orDoctorsAugustlSeptember 1992
I
I
I
Itemperatures. Phagocytosis seem.to
dependonafunctional microtubule system
withinthewhitecell•.)
Butthereasonforthenervecen'.
death,andforthetangle.offilamenta
withinlivingcells,seemstobe.metabolic
problemofthenerveun.themselvy. A
fewyearsago,therewalltalkofa
similarity between the"amytaid" deposits,
andthebloodprotein, pre-albumin. Since
thatproteintransporta vitamin Aand
thyroxin, I,..-ondered aboutthepossible
effectscLavitaminAdeficiency. Vitamin
Aregulates J}'SC*JDles. andBOadeficiency
mightpromote theaccumulation of
intracellular debris.Iti.anantioxidant,
andsoadeficiency mighttendtoinduce
the8tress-hypoKia proteins, anditisused
massively inthesynthesis ofllteroids (for
example, progesterone supplementation
sparesvitamin A).Butpossibly most
important isthe-de-differentiation" that
occursinmanycell.inavitamin A
deficiency. Intheskinandmucous
membranes, avitamin Adeficiency acta
likeanexcessofutrogen, topromote the
formationmkenltin.
Twentyyeanago,Englishresea.rchen
foundvirus-like shapeainthebrainsm
oldpeople,andsuggested thatsenility
mightbecausedbyavinJs.Later,ooem
themfoundthataged.braintissueW88
antigenically similartoscrapie-infected
braintissuefromayounganimal,and
antigenically distinctfromhealthyyoung
tissue.1
Insizeandover·allstructure, keratin
filaments aresimilar tothescrapie
particles, andtothefilaments that
accumulate inAlzheimer's disease.Ithink
ofkeratinasaproteinmadebyacell
whichhlUllosttheenergytomakemore
functional proteins_ Normally, keratinized
cellsareformedbyrapid('811divisionata
bodysurface, wherelittleenergyis
available. InchronicvitaminAde6ciency,
thekeratin.forming cellsdividemore
rapdilythannormal. DandnJff andthe
moistwhiteequivalent ofdandruff on
mucous membranes, leucoplakia, are
promoted byadeficiency ofvitamin A,or
anexce811ofestrogen. Radiation often
causesasimilarhyperkeratosis, probably
bydestroying vitamin A,and,like
estrogen, byc.reating arespiratory eff@(:t.
IsuspectthattheplaquesinAlzheimer's
diseasearethebrain'sequivalent tothe
plaquesofleucoplakia, orofdandruff, and
thattheovergrowth oftheglialcellsis
theresultofthesametendency ofcellsto
dividerapidly, whilethenon-dividing
neurons accumulate anexcessoffibrous
proteinsthatcan'tbedegraded.
Townsend LetterforDoclonAuguat/ScpUlmbcr 1992Indegenerative diseases, thestres.­
andage•induced accumulation ofiron
andothermitochondria-toxic material
(e.g.,calcium, aluminum, andlipid
perozidation product. including age­
pigment) andthefailureofdetoxifying
systems maketherapy withordinary
nutritional supplements fairlyineffective.
Directsupplementation ofthevarious
natural protective substances (ortheir
analogues) inaddition totheprot«tive
vitamins (especially E)andmine-ral.
(especially magnesium) i.more
appropriate.
Thesupplementation ofprenenolone,
etc_,willallowdietaryvitamin Atobe
sparedforotherpurposes, including
regulation ofmitoeis,differentation, and
oxidation.
GABA-related metabolites, suchas
CHB,butyricacid,succinicacid,andthe
butyrobetaines, havemultiple protective
functions, including promotion of
respiration andpregnenolone synthesis,
regulating geneexpression, andreducing
damagefromglucocorticoids.
DHEAseemstobeinvolved invarious
regenerative processes, andadeficiency
ontisprognoetic ofincreased probability
ofdeathfromvariouscauses,including
cancer,heartdisease,andAIDS.
Progesterone hasthespecialstatusof
beinganessential nervegrowthfactor,
andgenerally blocksthecatabolic actions
oftheglucocorticoids andestrogen,
therebyprotecting alltissues,frombrain
cellstowhitebloodcells.
Thyroid hormone protects against
stre811andsupporta normaldifferentiation.
Shortandmedium-c:hain saturated
fattyacidsprovideasafeBOurceofenergy,
aswellashavinghormone-like and
adaptogenic effecta. Theshort-chain
saturated fattyacidaareimportant in
regulating bowelnora.M@(:hnikov's idea
ofaltering thenorawithcultured milk
wasontherighttrack,butmuchmore
needstobedoneonbacterial nutrition
andtoxinformation.
Raymond Peat,Ph.D.
HeyPeet'.Newdetter
P.O.Box3427
Eugene, Oregon97403
503-345-9855Reference.
1.G.G.Nahas,etal.Directmeasurement
ofleukocyte motility: effectsofpHand
temperature, Proc.Soc.Exp.BioLend
Med.138,p.350-352, 1971.
2.N.R.Ling,Lymphocyte StirnulctwlI,
North-Holland PubI.Co,Amsterdam,
1968.
3.E.J.Field, 'Illesignificance ofaatroglial
hypertrophy inscrapie,KUnJ,multiple
sclerosis andoldage together witha
noteonthepossible natureofthe
scrapie agent,Deut.che Zeit.fur
NerwwilltuJUU 192,p.265.274,1967.
MonLetten >
SUBSCRIPTION
RATES
INCREASE IN
NOVEMBER
Foryourinformation
Average IssuePostageCosts
ThirdClassDomestic $1.50
FirstClassDomestic $3.00
PrintedMatter
Canada&Mexico $2.75
International $6.00
Surface Overseas $2.75
Sendusa
changeofaddress
NOTICE
Shouldyoumovebeforetelling
usinwriting&thepostoffice
doesDotforward yourissues­
youwillneedtosend88.00per
issuelostorreturned as
undeliverable.
739
