Chronic Fatigu,e
•byRayPeat,Ph.D.
RayPeat'sNewsletter
Agoodthingaboutscienceisthateven
dull·witted peoplecanmakerealcontributions
toknowledge, byworking carefully and
melhodicaRy. ScienceIoleraies (butdoesn't
require)quiteabit01stupidity.ButIamInclined
tothinkthaIeducation (ortraining) Inscience
Isheavilybiasedtowardstupidity. ItIsthrough
education thattheachievements otscience
become part01ourculture.andourculture
Influences thefuttlredirections sciencewill
take.So,bothscienceandourculturewoold
bebenerot!ifwewouldhabitually askwhether
thescientist's basicassumptions areJustified,
whatalternative explanations hadbaen
considered. exactlywtlatIsmeantbyaspecific
word.andsoon.Suchquestions almostalways
revealthemostembarrassing weaknesses in
8position that-almosteveryone agreesis
correct.-InbIok:>gyandmedicine, Itseemshi
neartyeveryone explains almosteverything
¥tilhalewinter1ocKi1g ideas:DNA,mernbn!I"Ies,
membrane punps,membnlne receplOfS and
recepklrs fortheDNA,andionchannels A
beliefintheexplanatory poweroftheseIdeas
canconvertanobservation thatbacteria
behavealittleoddlywhentheyaregiveneltlyl
aIoohoI.Intoapublishable speculalioo onthe
"mole<:lJlar biology01membranes."
WhentheCtIIIs01lat,ordepressed. Of
tiredpeoplearefoundtobeIn!IIlowenergy
state,defective membranes, ormembrane
pumpsormembrane raceptors areoften
mentioned. Sincephospholipids,which contain
fattyacids01variousdegreesofunsaturatlon,
arebelievedtobeamajorcomponent of"the
membranes: somepeoplearguethateaUng
moreofthepolyunsaturated fatswillhelp10
buildnewmembranes, ortoIncrease the
"fluidity" 01themembranes. IIitissuggested
thathcellsshouldbeproducing moreenergy,
somepeoplesuggest that,sinceIhe
"mitochondrial membranes" arehighly
unsaturated, eating moreofthe
pofyunsaturated fatswi.helpthemtoproduce
moreenergy.
AcrucialenzymeinthemitochOndrion is
cytochrome olCidase, wtjchreactsdirectlyWIth
oxyoen, ~ting (Ofbegrnlng) theprocess
ofchenicaI respiration. Itisthisenzyme(whict1
Ismostsensitive tocyanide) whM:tIappearsto
bea"'choke~rforenergyproduCtiOn in
varioussituations. learning howtopreserve
andpromote theactivityofthisenzymeisan
important Issueloreverything havingtodo
withblologicaI energy.
Mitochondria fromanimalswhicharefeda
dietlackingthe"essential" unsaturated fatty
acidsaremoreresistant tooxidation thanthe
mitochondria fromanimalsledastandard diet
containing unsaturated oils,buttheyalsohave
verydillerent Invitroswellingbehavior. R.M.
Johnson's invastigations (Exp.CellRes.32,
11B-127,1963)suggested that"theswelling
tendency Inlivarmitochondria ..Jsassociated
withalteredrespiratory and/orphosphofylating
machanlsms ratherthanwithmembrane
'"a1teration.- KunkelandWilIams(J.BioI.QIem.,
1951)foundthattheveryhighrespiratory rate
ofanimalsledadietlackingpoIy\.wlsaturated
falSwascausedprimarily byagreatincrease
intheactivity01cytochrome oxidase,andthat
addingan"essential fattyadd"stronginhibited
thisenzyme's actIVity. (OtherInteresting
observations werethat"endogenous"
respiration waslowintheoll-delicienl animals
withahighmetabolic rate,andaerobic
glycolysis failed10prodlJCe energy,while
anaerobic glycolysis wasnormal.Warburg
emphasized theimportance 01aerobic
glycolysis incancermetabolism. Anaerobic
glycolysis occursInhealthycells.Aerobic
glycolysis -thekindwhichistypicalofcancer
-beingenergetically Idleintheseanimalsrnght
relate10theknownfreedom fromcancer 01
animalsW'hIchdonotreceiveunsalufated falS.)
Cytochrome oxidasecontains bothironand
copper, andIhecoppercomponent is
apparently responsible lortheenzyme's
absoq)tion 01redlight.Thecopper's function
iSn'tunderstood, butItissuspected tobe
involved inregulaUng theelliclency 01
respiration. Aproteincalledmelallolhionein,
wtictlisinduced bycortisol()(heavymetals,
alsobindscopper,andmightbeone01the
waysinwhichstressandheavymetalpoisoning
canacceterate theprocess ofagingand
degeneration.
ThesimilarityoIlheeHeetsotcyanideand
polyunsaturated latsonrespiration, andon
cytochrome oJddase, suggests thepossibility
thatthe"essential' fallyacidsmight,like
cyanide, formacomplex withthecopperion.
Unsaturated compounds, especially
unsaturated phospholipids, canlormstrong
chelation complexes withcopper.
Whilethyroidsupplementation produces
Increased activityofcytochrome oxidase, the
avoidance 01unsaturated oilswouldprobably,
toagreatextent,maketh)'foidsupplementation
Ul109Cessary tomaintainahighrateofhealth­
suppor1lng mitochondrial respiration.
Pregnenolone ollen nonna~zes metabolism in
awaythatcanmakethyroidsupplementation
urnecessary, andpart01itsactionisprobably
therasu/lofstabllizr.g then'lItoc:hondna. Even
choIestefOl(whichisconver1edtop~
ntllemitochondria) seemstohaveastabilizing
effect,sinceitinhibitsoxidation ofunsaturated
lats.
S.LEpel(Photophyslologyvol. VUI,1973,
pp.209-230), di~ theevidence showing
thatbluelightInhbilsrespiration byinactivating
cytoctvorne oxidase,andsays"IIitisconceded
thatthisphenomenon Isuniversal, itisthen
Intuitively obviousthatmostorganisms must
possess aprotective oractiverepair
mechanism sincesunlightappearstobediractty
detrimental tofeworganisms.'
Themanystudieswhichshowthatred
lightpromotes respiration probablyexplaintha
factthatthebluelightInsunlightisn'tvery
harmful,sincethesunelsocontainsredlight,
whichwouldtandtoreversethedamagedone
bytilebluelight.Sinceredlighlpenetrates
muchmoredeeplyIntoanimaltissuesthandoesblueorultraviolet radlation, largerarimaIs
wouldbemorestrongly allected bythe
beneficial fractions of~t -theIntemal
tissuesreceiveonlyredlight.
Thewintersicl<nessandstresaofdal1a'less
thatIhavetalkedaboutsomucharemetabolic
dIsturbances resutting homInelllclent
respiration, andinvolvefatigue,hypoglycemia
wlthsugarcravings, andhormone Imbalances
whichlead10nutritional problems, suchas
vitaminAdelideocy.
AlthOUgh healthyrespiration ismanylimes
moraeffICient thanglycolysis Inproducing
usableenergy,thecombined ellectsofgettlng
adequate redlightandusingbutterandcoconut
011Insteadofunsaturated oilswillcausea
greatincreaseinenergyconsumption. People
withas1gnilicant amounlollatInIhelrbody,
whohaveInthepasteatenfoodscontaining
vegetable oils,arelikelytodrawunsaturated
fatsoutofstorage,withtoxicellectsunless
vitarrinE,thyroid,andcocooutoilareused
protectively untiltissuestoresofunsaturated
fatsaredepleted. (Typically, bodystores01fat
takekuyearsto~tely reflectthechange
toadillerent typ&otdietaryfat.)
Coconut oilisrichinlauricacid.whichIs
belfl9discussed latelyasananti-viral agent.
Lauricaddinhibitsglycolysis, sococonuIoil
willtendtoprevent hypoglycemia, while
provilflOQ non-gIycoIytic calories dlrKtly10the
respiratory system.
Milkandshrimpcancontribute to
mitochondrial resplratOl')' efficiency. sincemilk
hasalowIroncontent. andshrimparevery
richIncopper.Ironisanimportant catalyslln
thelormation 01freeradicals, andcopperis
InvolvedInprotecting againstIron,aswellas
Inthelunction 01cytochrome oxidase. (Even
belOfeHartrollandPortadiscussed, In1967,
theIree·radlcal promoting activity01ironwhich
forms"ege-pigment," ironwasknownasa
carcinogen Ofcancerpromoter. (J.Baloandl.
Banga,"Ellectofmetalcomplexes upon
experimental carcinoma,' ActsUn.Int.Cancer,
13,463-5,1957; A.HaddowandE.S.Homing,
"Onthecarcinogenicity ofanIron-dextran
complex," J.Nst.C8nc6rlnst. 24,109,1960.)
Anemiacancauselatigue,andiron(like
arseolc)tendstostimulate theformation 01red
bloodcells,somar'I)'peopleadvocate iron
supplements forctv'onicfatigue.Although the
mnedlate ellectistodelivermorebloodtothe
tissues,providingmoreenergy,thelong-range
ellectsarenotgood,especially whenIronis
added10adietcontairWIg significant amounts
oftheLlnS8lUrated fats.Whenanema Iseaused
bysomething otherthanirondeficiency (andIt
usuallyIs),itisImportant tofindtheaetuaI
cause.Thyroiddeficiency, estrogenexcess,
variousvitamindeliciencies, proteindeficiency,
andvariousothermlneraldalidencias should
beconsidered.
Reference: JournaloftheNalional Cancsr
lnstilute24(109),1960.
ForSubscription toRayPeat'sNewsleller,
write:
RayPeat,Ph.D.
P.O.Box5764
Eugene,OR97405
TOWNSENO LETTER 10f'DOCTORS _.JULY'""
