~epresentgovernment oftheU.S.
istalking aboutreforming the
educational systemandthehealth
caresystem.Itisclearthattheinsurance
companies andothercomponents ofthe
medicalestablishment aren'tgoingtobe
inconvenienced bythereforms, Teachers,
ontheotherhand,areincreasingly being
madethescapegoats forournational
decline. Iwanttopropose thatan
orientation towardresults,ratherthan
procedures, istheessential reformthat
weneedinbothhealthcareandeducation.
Thegoalsofbothhealthcareand
education, Ithink,aret.omaximize
abilities andpleasures, minimizing
disabilities anddispleasures. TheWorld
HealthOrganization hasdefinedhealth
intenn5ofdecreasingdYScldaptations, and
improving ouradaptation toour
SWTOUOdinga.
AsFelixMeerson (described inmy
monograph ·Resistance oftheheartM
)has
shown,thebrainisthepreferred organof
adaptation, because adaptation onthe
levelofleaming hasnobiological costs,in
thesenseoflimiting ourstructure and
function. Assoonaswesubmittoa
culturalslereotype oratextbook answer,
wegiveupourcreativecapacity toadapt
mentally, andbegintoavoidproblems,
questions, andmysteries, because
adaptation atanylevelotherthancreative
imagination isabodilystress;the
acceptance ofauthority commits aperson
towielding anyauthority theyhave,or
helplessly adapting totheauthority of
others. Fullhealth requires the
responsible andcreativeuseofthemind.
Thisiswhyrthinkitisnecessary to
consider thereformofhealthcareand
education together, asasingleprojectof
cultural reform.
Certainthingsledmeintoahabitof
doubting theexperts.Forexample, inhigh
schoolIhadastate-certified biology
teacherwhorefusedtomention theword
"evolution," anAmerican historyteacher
whoworshipped Hitler,anda·civics·
teacher whotoldracejokesinclass.
Although itwasn'ttheirapparent
intention, theywerecontributing
something tomyeducation. Inagraduate
schoolseminar inAmerican literature, I
mentioned therelevance ofsocialclassto
theworkohomewriter,andtheprofessor
interrupted toteUmethat"thereareno
classesintheUnitedStates";Iexplained
thatIdidn'tmeanclassorcasteinthelegaUyenforced sensethatIndiaand
England havethem,butsociaJ-eoonomic
classes.Atthal,everystudent inthe
seminarjoinedwiththeprofeuor tomake
itclearthatIcouldn't goonwithmy
discussion if[badtorefertothe"non­
C'lristent" socialclasses.Thatsamesummer
term,Iwaslooking forajobata
community college,andjustafewhours'
drivefromthegreatuniversity Ifound
myselfinthemidstofhorrifying
unimaginable squalor.MyfeUewstudents
hadgrownupinthatregion,andhadto
knowaboutthoseareas:.Theyhelpedto
makemeawarethatthereareacademic
fetish-ideas. Later1wouldfindthatthe
sciences werejustassusceptible to
academic fetishes,butthatthehumanities
hadtheadvantage ofatradition that
emphasizes criticaljudgement; whilethe
sciences baseundergraduate education
heavily ontextbooks, thehumanities
emphasize studyoforiginalmaterials.
Overaperiodofseveral years,I
enrolled asagraduate studentinseven
otherdepartments, andlearnedtoorient
myselftowhatIperceived asageneral
academic psychosis, withvariatiOM tosuit
thesubjectmatter;nodepartment, from
arttozoology, wasfreefromthecrazy
authoritarianism, butasmallpercentage
ofindividuals inanydiscipline seemed
abletoavoidthedogmatic frenzy,Once,
inthelate19609,1triedtocommunicate
myperception tostudents atthe
University ofOregon.Iorganized acourse
called"Interdepartmental Perspectives on
theNatureofMan,"Weinvitedthemost
highly-thought-of professors fromten
departments tolecture on"their
discipline's special contribution to
understanding humannature." Wehad
professors fromthesciences, socialscience,
philosophy andreligion, rhetoric, and
folklore. Sixweek.sintothecourse,we
hadheardsixprofessors deliveroneor
two-hour lectures onthecentral
importance ofNoamChomsky's generative
grammar forunderstanding thenatureof
man_Afterthesixthlecture,oneofthe
students tookmeasideandsaid"You're
playingatrickonus,aren'tyou?'"SinceI
hademphasized thattheprofessors should
talkabouttheirdepartment's special
contribution, Iwasn'tresponsible forthe
embarrassing stereotypy oftheirlectures,
butinfact,thatstudenthadunderstood
myreasonfororganiring theclass.Ina
laterdecade,·dec:onstructioniam" mighthavebeenthespecifie content ofthe
lectures, butthepointwouldstillbethat
theuniversity eurricu1um consi.stlliargely
ofstylish,borderline-psychotic, garbage.
(Seenfromacertain viewpoint, that
academie stuffseemsneithertrashynor
cra:ty,butratherelegant, noble,and
relevant. Youhavetoadoptthatviewpoint
towriteanApaper,youhavetodiscard
thatviewpoint todosomething useful
Thedesireforusefulknowledge leadsto
anattitudeofactivecriticism.)
Theacademiescienees andhumanities
areaimilarintheirfearofresponsibility
forknowledge. Everyone marches instep,
assignstherighttextbooks, andhold!
theacceptable assumptions, sothatthey
cankeeptheirjob.Ultimately (and
frequently enoughtokeeppeopleinline)
theboardoftrustees exercises itllpower
toherdtheuniversity facultyinthedesired
direction.
Because ofmyowneltpCriences asa
criticalstudent,in1959or1960Jconceived
ofhavingacoUegewhoseteachers and
students werethetrustees. (Wecalledit
BlakeCollege, forWilliam Blake.)
Responsibility wouldbeinstitutionalized,
tosomeextent.Tokeepstudents from
feelingthattheywereleavingthereal
worldwhentheyentered thecollege,I
proposed thatitshouldgrantdegrees
basedon"recognized achievement," andI
specifically suggested thattheBAdegree
shouldrequireascoreabovethe87th
percentile ontheGraduate Record
Examination, sincethisscorealoneshouJd
beenoughtogainadmittance toanygood
graduate program. Infact,private
universities generally recognized thata
OREscorehigherthanthatof87%ofthe
graduates fromrecognized UScollegeswas
areasonable basisforgraduate admission,
butthestateuniversities required that
theirapplicants havedegrees from
·accredited institutions." (Ourstudents all
received theirdegrees, andtheirGRE
scoresaveraged atthe95thpercentile. A
coupleofourstudents hadpreviously been
rankedinthelowest10%academically. A
changeoftheirfeelingsaboutknowledge
changed theirmental abilities.) The
regional aocred.iting association toldus
thattheywouldconsider manyfactors,
including thesizeofourendowment and
whetherwehadafootballteam,andmade
itclearthattheywereakindofmafia
thatwasn'tsympathetic withourideaof
~
TOWNSEND LETT£R 1MDOCTORS _NOVENM::A 1ll1M 12S1
~
requiring thateverygraduate haveahigh
levelofintellectual competence.
Whatthismeansisthatcompetence i!J
defmedua}enrolling intheinstitutions
presently established bygovernmental
authority; b)jumping throughtentoforty
hoopsperyear,foracertainnumber of
years;thesizeandheightofthehoopsare
setbytheauthorities inconsultation with
theexperts; c)incertaincases,oneortwo
flaming hoopsmayberequired, toexalt
theauthority oftheprofession. ArtPearl,
aprofessor ofeducation. usedtoargue
thatstudents shouldbeawarded their
degreeswhentheyenrollincollege,since
thedegreesdon'tstandforanyspecial
competence now,andthere<XJgDition of
thatwouldmakepeoplethinkaboutthe
actualqualifications neededfordoinga
job.Ifweeompare education totheritesof
initiation manycultures have,then
symbolizing entryintoadulthood witha
college degree, earned byafeatof
endurance, isn'tsostrange,buttheritual
couldbemodified sothatitdidn'tinterfere
withlearningthethingspeoplereallywant
tolearn.
Afterpeoplehaveproven their
obedience/compliance, byyearsof
expensive subservience, thentheymaybe
allowedtotakecertainIicensi.Dg eUiJI8.
Bylaw,thesetestsarenotsufficient
evidence ofcompetence, andonlythose
whoholdaccredited professional degrees
maytakethem.Ifpeoplewithoutdegrees
wereallowedtotakethelicensing exams,
itmightbediscovered thattheendurance­
training hadadetrimental effectonthe
students' problem-solving abilities.
Severalyearsago,itwasdiscovered that
students' IQsdecreased witheach
additional yeartheyspenti.Dcertain
schools.Inastudyofgraduate students,
itwasfoundthattherewasaninverse
relationship between theiracademic
standing andtheirdistance fromthemean
IQ,ineitherdirection, thatis,themean
IQisexcellent academically.
Ifweareconcerned withwhatpeople
knowandareabletodo,thenwecanflnd
waystohelpthemdevelopthekno.....ledge
andabilitythattheywant.However if
thatgoalisafraud,andwereallywanta
nationofobedient, &ubmissive, rigidand
uncritical peoplewhodon'trockanyboats,
thenweshouldjustworT}'aboutkeeping
gunsanddrugsoutoftheschoole
(remember themathgraduate student
whomurdered hisprofessor?) and
otherwise keeptheeducational systema8
itis,withemphasis onform,ratherthan
outcome.Theideaoftestingforcompetence
(withvarying degrees ofgenerality,
relating tospecific tasluJorabilityto
respondtonovelty)wouldfundamentally
change OUTeducational institutions, but
itsinfluence wouldextendintothe
workplace. Manyjobewoulddisappear if
everyone's competency improved. In
medicine, peopletalkaboutpayment for
keeping thepatientwell,insteadoffor
alleviating orcuringdisease,butkeeping
thepublichealthyisgoingtorequirea
m~orsocial efforttokeepfood,water,air,
homes,travelandworkplaces safe.If
peoplebecomeawareoftheirpotential for
creativeadaptation andproblemsolving,
thewholedirection oftheeconomy must
change, because statusandstyle­
dependent consumption derivetheir
importance fromtheabsenceofintrinsic
interestinmanyofouractivities.
Activecriticism isanoldideathatis
closeto-imaginative science." B.G.
Niebuhr isconsidered tohavefounded
German historiography withhisconcept
ofcriticizing thesourcedocuments. Goethe
usedthephrase"'tatigeskepsis" (active
doubt,constructive criticism) todescribe
Neibuhr's method. William Blake
emphasized thatcriticism andimagination
mustbecombined tocorrecterror;doubt
byitse1fisfutile,imagination isvulnerable
without organized andactivecriticism.
Morerecently, Salvador Dali'sconceptof
"critical paranoia~ advocated thesame
intelligent useofthebrain,todiscover
whatistrue,important, andinteresting
inambiguous situations. Meersoo, the
investigator ofstressphysiology, speaks
ofadaptive cultureastheflTStlevelof
protection againstharmfulconditions.
Forabout50yean,theconcept
"psychosomatic~ hasbeentrivialized to
mean-it',justimaginary: Butnow,the
studiesofthephysiology ofhelplessness
showthataseemingly smalldifference in
experience andattitudecancauseavery
greatdifference intheabilitytomobilize
biological energyandvariousaspectsof
immunity, suchasNatural Killercell
activity.Thereisnowgeneralagreement
onthedistinction betweenthedemobilized
stateofhelplessness andthestateofaetive
adaptation. Ifeveryone couldbe
-Vaccinated" againsthelplessness, there
wouldbeageneralimprovement inhealth
andabilitytolearn.Butirrational
institutions keepmakinghelplesspeople.
Aculturewhichpromoted aresponsible,
creativeuseofcriticalintelligence would
minimize theexperience ofhelple88nes,;
andatthesametimeitwouldshiftouradaptive habitsupward, towardseeking
reasonable imaginative solutions to
problems thatnowareoftenperceived as
stressesandthreats.
Aftermyexperience atBlakeCollege,
inwhichtheessence oftheinstitution
wastosupporttheinclination ofstudente
andteaeNn towardbeingresponsible for
knowledge, Ifoundthatitwasoften
possibletoreinterpret institutional rules
tocreateasimilartemporary environment
within theexisting conventional
universities.
Thegreatest impediment todoingthis
isprobably thefearofunemployment;
subscribing totheCUlTCntacademic idiocy,
ortheCUlTCotclicheofthemarketplace,
isfelttobenecessary tof1tin.Inquestions
ofhealthandeducation OUTcultureisata
critical point.Things couldbe
reinstitutionalized togiveallpowertothe
drug,insurance andcommunication
industries, ortheycouldbegintobede·
institutionalized toexpandthescopefor
intelligent individual activity.
ArtPearl'ssuggestion thatstudents
beautomatically granteddegreescanbe
seenasthestudent's equivalent oftenure.
lfteachen weremuchmoresecureabout
theirjobs,therewouldn't besomuch
pressure toconform. Therearefoolishand
wickedteachers, andgoodandwise
teachers. Ifstudents knowthereare
objective standards ofachievement, they
won'tbeundertheteachers' power;
teachers willbechallenged bytheneeds
andcuriosities ofthestudents. Students
willnecessarily becomeconscious ofthe
needtoexamine andquestion thesource
ofinformation. LitUekidsnaturally have
thatinclination, whichistheinclination
ofgoodscientists andartists.
TheJapanese haverelatively high
levelsofachievement ineducation. They
alsoinvented crawl-in hotel ·rooms,~
stufferstopackpeopleintosubways, and
snap-on apartments. Theirachievement
comesatthepriceofexhaustion, misery,
anddiseasesofstress.Theyrepresent one
ofourpotential futures. Theother
potential futuretakesintoaccount our
healthandhappiness, anddefmeshealth
ashavingthecapacity forcreativemental
adaptation.
RayPeat
RayPeat'sNewsletter
P.O.Box5764
Eugene, OR97405
•
1252 TOWNSENO t.£TTER lorDOCTORS _NOVEMBER lM4
