Visa/MasterCard OrdersSubscribe Today!
ToOrderbyPhone
360-385-6021Critiquing
"Dr.McDaniel
Responds" Letter
Editor.
Peoplehaveexpresaed concerntome
aboutstatements intheletter(June,
1996)fromH.RegMcDaniel, Director
oftheFisherInstitute forMedical
Research. Although itisheaded"Dr.
McDaniel Responds," theletterisn't
responsive toKenneth Sander's
questions, andevenseemstofurther
blurthe"identity" issuethatSanciel'"
Bskedahout.Theeditordescribes
McDaniel asaconsultant forthe
company thatmarkets "dioscorea,· I
don'tknowifthatisaccurate. Dozens,
maybehundreds, ofpeoplehaveasked
meaboutachartusedinmarketing
Emprise products thatindicates
diosgenin isaprecursor ofDHEA.
Although Ican'timaginewhatenzymes
mightachievethatconversion, noone
seemstowant.tosaywhether their
products containdiosgenin orDHEA 01'"
yamtissue.Iftbeycontainyamtissue,
thentheyshouldbedi8CU88ing theissue
oftoxicity.
Idon'tdoubtMcDaniel's claimthat
thestatements hemakes"reflectthe
consensus ofaresearch pharmacologist.
biochemist, molecular biologist,
gastroenterologist andgastrointestinal
physiologist. asweDasphysiciana who
interpret scientific data....•Whilethe
editorsofJAMAmakesimilarclaims
abouttheauthoritative natureoftheir
publication, Jnoticed acompletely
idioticstatement ahoutyamsandsteroidsinthatjournal,indicating that
theyamsusedbythesteroidindustry
werethesameasedibleyams.(There
areabout600typesofateroid·rich yam;
atypicalonelookslikeBigfoot,weighs
asmuchas90pounds,andispoisonoua.)
McDaniel's groupofspecialists were
askedtoevaluate thesetofartic:lescited
inhisletter.Itwouldsoomthatneither
McDaniel norhisprofessionals bothered
toreadthearticles. Although noneof
McDaniels' sentences standsuptoclose
scrutiny, letmecomment onbalfofone
ofhissentences: (animals1 •...were
administered diosgenin anditwas
converted bytheadrenals to
pregnenolone andthentoestrogen,' (3)
oraldiosgenin reversed experimental
diabetes! (4)oraldiosgenin lowered
bloodcholesterol levels,4(5)diosgenin
hasalsoshownthecapacity toinduce
megakaryocytic differentiation ofbone
marrowstemcellsintissueculture;a
demonstration ofhormonal regulatory
influence attheceUularlevelexpressed
freeofothersources ofendocrine
influence ......
Farfromsayingthatdiosgenin is
converted bytheadrenals to
pregnenolone andestrogen, Rao,etaI.,
sayithasnotbeenascertained whether
itactsdirectlyorbybeingmetabolized.
Theirevidence arguesagainstthat,by
"excluding anypossibility ofdiosgenin
havingprogesterone-like activity in
mouse," sinceanypregnenolone
produced wouldbefarmorelikelyto
produceprogesterone-like effectsthan
estrogenic effects.A.Lipshutz's work
madethatclear.
Although Iamnotfamiliar with
dioscoretine, andhaven'treadthepaperbyM.M.Iwu,etaI.,theirabatract
strongly suggests thatithasnothingto
dowithdiosgenin, because their
hypoglycemic substance hasanLD50in
miceof0.58gIkg,anddiosgenin isn't
likelytobethattoxic.Thepaperbylwu,
etaI.,wasn'tabout"reversing diabetes;
butonlyabouttheobservation that
di08COretine lowered bloodsugarafter
fourhoursinrabbits. Thousands of
otherseriously toxicsubstances can
causeasuddendecrease inbloodsugar.
McDaniel indicates thatMaIinow, et
aI.,studiedtheeffect&oforaldiosgenin
oncholesterol, but,astheirtiUesaya,
theywereexamining digitonin, atoxin
fromadifferent familyofplants.Since
McDaniel brought upthesubjectby
citingthisdigitonin study,Ishould
mentionthatoneoftheeffectsseenby
otherresearchers, withDioBcorea­
derived cOJ:Dpounds, ischronotropic
heartstimulation, suggesting aparallel
todigitalis.
Beneytout. etaI.,describe theHEL
cellsasahumanerythroleukemia cell
line,whichisn'ttheaameasMcDaniel's
description ofthemas·stemcells;and
theycompare theeffectofdiosgenin to
thatofphorbol myristate acetate
treatment, andsaynothingthatcould
beconstrued as~ademonstration of
hormonal regulatory influence atthe
cellular levelexpressed freeofother
sourcesofendocrine influence.- Phorbol
myristate estersarerecognized as
potentc:o-carcinogena. Bothdiosgenin
andPMAcausedanincrease inthe
numberofcellscontaining 4ormore
nuclei.Diosgenin, wemightconclude, is
aseffective asPMAinpromoting
abnonnal development incancercells.
Thiswouldsuggestthatdiosgenin is
something tobeavoided.
HMcDaniels getspaidfor
mentioning DHEA, pregnenolone,
diosgenin, anddi08COr6a onthesame
page,hehasdonehisjob.Butthe
TownMnd Ldursimportant forumfor
uncensored dialogue isabusedwhen
someone usesitrepeatedly forevasive
verbiage andmisstatement offact.
RayPeat
POBox5764
Eugene, Oregon97405USA
'00TOWNsENn ~R lorDOCTORS ...AT1E.NT'S -AUGUSTfSEPT£MBER 1,,"
