.
A~~1------- 1.'yL I---'A---
Diagnosing Porphyria
forLaborand
Industries Claims
Editor:
Polycythemia, scleroderma, and
porphyria haveseveral elements in
common, butIhaveneverseena
discussion orthis.Although Ihavewritten
aboutthembefore,myarticlesonthese
subjects haven'tbeenwidelypublished.
WhenIsawallofthesetopicsmentioned
onthessmepageoftheTownsend Letter
(February/March 1996,page98),it
seemedthatIshouldpointoutsomeof
thefeatures thatmaketheseasortof
familyofdisorders.
Thesearedisorders oftissue
rcspiration andenergy production.
Oxygen, estrogen, andironhave
important rolcsinallofthem.Menare
morelikelytohavepolycythemia, women
aremorelikelytohavesderodenna and
sometypesofporphyria.
TheWashington StateDepartment of
LaborandIndustries' reviewofporphyria
isrepresentative ofabureaucratic
approach toadiseaseinitsexclusion of
allofthepublications that.offeran
opportunity tounderstand itsmechanism
inageneralway;Ithinkit.issettingthe
stageforapro-industry/anti-worker
policy,indrawing itlldistinction bet.ween
problems "t.riggered by~exogenous
chemicals, andthose·potentially colUed
byaneJ:ogenous chemical eJ:p08ure. ~
Scientifically, thissortofcategorization
ismeaningless. Ithinkitisreasonable to
interpret anyincrease inporphyrin
metabolism aspossibleevidence ofwork­
relateddamage, whichcompromises the
worker's adaptive capacityinmanyways.
Thedocument atonepointapproaches
arecognition ofthesilliness oftheir
approach: -Itcanbearguedsemantically
thatthiswasnotatrue'porphyria,'
because oftheabsence ofhereditary
enzymedeficiency; however, thereislittle
question thatthisacquired 'porphyria­
like'condition washighlymorbidandalso
clinically indistinguishable fromthe
inherited formofporphyria cutanea
tarda."
Untilthedoctrineofsignificant genetic
causation issubjected totherequirement
ofbeingobtained in"arigorously de,ign«l.
blinded andappropriately controlled
maJlner," itwouldhavetobeconsidered
"speculatiue andunestablished," ifthisdocument werecoherent. fitsppearsthat
itsauthorsdrewtheirgunintending to
crippleabranchofaltemabn medicine,
andahottheirargument inthehead.)
Thedocument's emphasis ondefUling the
diseaseintermsofgeneticdeficiency gives
theenterprise anover....helmingly
anecdotal quality,atbest.Letusseethe
rigorous evidence onwhichthe
categorization isbased.
Thedocument basesitswhole
presentation onthepresumed realityof
"hereditary deficiency~ ofenzymes, and­
probably forareason-ignores the
evidence foranenzymeexceu,whichcan
besoeasilyinduced chemicaJ.ly or
hormonally. EarlystepsinthepropbJl'''in
synthetic pathway areinfluenced bythe
availability ofprecursor substances and
bytheconcentration ofheme,andare
eJ:tremely susceptible toenvlrolllDl!:D.taI
influences. Theissueoftheroleofgene!:
inthebalance andorganization ofa
complexenzymesystemissotenuousthat
thecitizensofWashington shouldlook
intothestate'smanner ofchoosing ita
experts.
Thereisalonghistoryofinvestigating
theinteractions ofporphyria metabolism
withestrogen (L.C.Strong,Sexdifferences
inpigment contentofHarderian glands
ofmice,Proc.Soc.Exp.Bioi.Med.60,
1223-125,1942), withcancer(e.g.F.H.J.
Figge,etal.,Canoer Res.2,335-342,1942),
withdiet,andwithexcessiron.Eatrogena
areknowntocauseporphyria (R.D.
Levere,Blood28,569-572, 1966),andto
encerbate thesymptoms andbiocht'JJlical
disturbances inpeoplewithsubclinical
porphyria. Sometimes symptoms occur
premenstrually, duringthetimeof
increased estrogen production -thetenD
·ovulocyclic porphyria" haabeeninuse
foralongtime.Puberty therefore
increases thesusceptibility to
symptomatic episodes.
Porphyria synthesis beginsatan
important cross·over pointofproteinand
carbohydrate metabolism. Succinyl eoA
andaminolevulinic acidcanenterthe
Krebscycleortheporphyria pathway.
Protein catabolism feedsintothese
pathways. Increased proteincatabolism
orblockage ofoxidative consumption of
Krebscyclefuel-forexample bypoisoning
-makestheseprecursors available to
entertheprophyrin pathway. Stress­
inducedoxidation ofhemecaneliminate
feedback control,butthespecificout.eome
canbemodified inmanyways.Manyseriouslong-range consequence
ofexcessheme/porphyrin production and
metabolism arecurrently being
investigated, suggesting thatacriterion
of·twicetheupperlimitofnormal"
eJ:cretion, forrecognizing thataproblem
eJ:ists,couldallowfarmoreserious
problems todevelop overtime,thaton
thesurface mightseemunrelated to
porphyria. Insomecasesofporphyria
cutanea tarda, scleroderma-like
hardening ofskinoccurs, butthe
ramifications ofdisturbed heme
metabolism, resulting fromexogenous
factors,arefar-reaching. }o~orexample,
G.Y.Kennedy, attheCancerResearch
Laboratory, University oiSheffield,
observed thataporphyrin shortened the
timerequired toinducetumors, and
porphyrin derivatives havebeenproposed
tobe"cancerhormones" Thecarbon
moooJ:ide produced inthebreakdown of
hemeinhibitsmanyenzymes.
Thesynthesis ofhemelporphyrin, and
theproduction ofredbloodceUs,are
stimulated byalackofoxygen,orbytoxins
suchasarsenicandiron,whichcause
oJ:idative stress.Emphysema, high
elevation, sluggish circulation, and
nortumal breathing problemB cancause
enoughoxygendeficiency tostimulate the
fOfn'l8tionofnew redbloodcells.Newborn
babiesofUonhavepolycythemia, asa
,..w.toflimitedprenatal oxygensupply.
AtIIcertain point,thecontinued
production ofredbloodcellscanmake
theblood10viscousthatthisviscosity
implW'S circulation through capillaries,
andenatelaviciouscircle,stimulating
thefonnation ofmoreredbloodcells.Men
aremorelikelythanwomentohave
polycythemia robravera,possiblybecause
testosterone isanabolic totbebone
marrow, andestrogen tendstoslowblood
cellformation (females ofallspeciesare
relatively ~anemic: compared tomales,
partlybecausetheirbloodismoredilute),
butIthinkthegreaterabilityofmen's
marrow torespond proliferatively to
byporia isinfluenced bymanyfactors,
including different nutritional
requirements. (Estrogen tendstocause
certainvitamin deficiencies andfluid
retention.) Estrogen alsosignificantly
lowers bodytemperature, while
testosterone tendstoraiseit,andthe
temperature ofthebones18apowerful
factorinformingnewbloodcells.Butthis
isn'ttoauggestthatthepatientcould
benefitfromincreased estrogen, because
..TOWNSEND LETTEA lorDOCTORS &PATIENTS _APRIL11196
eltrogeD conU5untlJ Ienthe
availability fIIGSJII!Il.
Eue. rechx..thebiood'i
oxygenatxln. formmple_producing a
barrier'0 .t;IIiaeon mthelung.
Hypoth~loidiaa Whidl.c:ausally related
toa.a~fill~ isknownto
predi..apoee toewpb).....andtreatment
withth\"ft7id h&Ioftencured
polycythellua ...~r-apr-elumably by
impr-O\;DIo'! nspu..,oryefficiency.
Progeste1'ODe.,....t.::b asknowntostimulate
thebrain'l~eontrol systilm,has
al80been0Md.successfully totreat
polycy1.hemia, ....10animalstudiesit
corrects experimentally induced
emphyuma Thesetreatments for
poly~ ft'I'awerementioned about
30yearsCO~JA.}lA.Ithink,thoughI
don·tmem.m thai.10gi1.-etheobservations
eredibility toshowhowgenerally
distribuLed 1:1»mfonnation hasbeen).In
Colorad _heretheincidence of
polyC)~ 11.high,itwasfoundthat
teachin.mIDL:;getinthehabitof
breathinc-.edftoplycouldsolvethe
problem.
A!~hasbeenamedical
factionu.&5Judtorompare polycythemia
with1~lk_a 10justifytreatment with
radiation rcytotoxidcarcinogenie
chemoth~npy •andfollowing the
treatmmlt., _peti.entsdidgetleukemia,
confirrmng tlwdoctors' beliefinthe
oonnecboD~ thetwodiseases),
simply Iewo<iucaome bloodandreplacing
itwithnbnngthevolullleofred
eellsdown1045to50%improves exereise
perfornaDClt 10polyeythemia patients
witbchnmic bronchitis, emphysema,
overinfl&1ed andhypoxia (B.D.W.
Harrison. d.aLClln.Sei.45,833-847,
1973),llPWard,etal.(Am.J.Med.45,
880-8~a :·Sfoundthatinsome
pstienta ~do'fo"Dorsleeping could
causeen£":1oxygen deficiency to
increase rbloodcellformation.
Increued~ ofblood,a.adinaeased
levelaofadnaalm produced inresponse
tohypona, cauaeinereased riskof
excelli" bkIOddottingandthrombosis.
InmyexpellBlCe, clinicalemphysema
responds, "'..topregnenolone, and
formen. ....advantages overboth
proget;ten!De -.Ithyroid.
Impaan Iua&function isvery
commoniD....hetma.,evenwhenthere
seem.toMDO!evidence oflung
involvemea1 CTHuanga.adH.A.Lyons,
Am. R~tI.Rnp..Du.93,865-875, 1966).
MetalV'•.'1lSoftenmentionedas
acauserthporphyria and
scleroderma. It_probably thismedical
association &betcaUMdHansSelyeto
createtheIIIIIimIdmodel,inwhichthe
injection ofU'OQcontributed tothedevelopment ofsclerodenna. (H_Selye,J.
Invest.Derm.39,259, 1962;SelyeandB.
Tuchweber, Quart.J.Exper.Physiol. SO,
196,1965.)Injectedirondamages theliver
(JANissim.Theentryofironintoliver
parenchyma cellsfollowing injection of
different ironpreparations, andthe
different lesionsproduced withtoxic
doses,J.ofPhysiology 117,66-67,1952),
andpractically anykindofliverdamage
leadstoestrogen excessandachronic
stress-like adaptive response.
Scleroderma usedtobedescribed as
oneofthe·collagen diseases,~ because
similarchangcs inbloodvesselsand
connective tissueswereseeninsystilmic
lupuserythematosus, rheumatoid
arthritis, polyarteritis, drug
hypersensitivity, etc.(G.P.Rodnan;
Progressive systemic sclerosis
(scleroderma), inJ.1.Hollander andD.J.
McCarty, Jr.,editors,Arthritu andAllied
Conditions, Lea&Febiger, 1972).
Scleroderma (similar toseveralotber
·autoimmune~ diseases) ismuchmore
common inwomenthaninmen,and
animalmodelsforseveralautoimmune
diseases canbeproduced withestrogen
treatment. Selerodenna oftenbeginswith
edemaoftheextremities, Raynaud's
phenomenon, andmuscleweakness or
·polymyositis; whicharecommonly seen
inhypothyroidismlhyperestrogenism.
Itisgenerally agreedthatcollagen is
overproduced inscleroderma, andthere
isevidence ofincreased
mucopolysaccharides intheskin(0.
Braun-Falco, Derm.Wschr.136,1085,
1957).Thisisreminiscent ofhypothyroid
myxedema; ithasbeensuggested that
mucopolysaccharides canactlUIamatrix
forcalcification (W.C.Johnson, etaI.,J.
Invest.Derm.43,453,1964).Estrogen
stimulates theformation ofcollagen, and
increases itsage-like properties, and
progesterone opposessomeofthesepro­
agingeffectsonconnective tissues.Mere
lackofosygenstimulates collagen
formation, andtheopposing effectsof
estrogen andprogesterone ontissue
oxygenation canaccountformanyofthe
tissuechangestheyproduce.
Oxygendeprivation causestissuesto
ntaincalcium(andiron),asdoesestrogen
inmanycases,beingsimilartoagingin
promoting cellular uptakeofcalcium.
Sincetheporphyrins stronglybindmetals,
ithasbeensuggested thattheymayhave
aroleinmediating thedeposition of
metalsinstressed tissues. Paroxysmal
vasospasm occursinabout90%of
scleroderma patients, andestrogen and
adrenalin areknowntosynergize in
producing valcular spasm;
hypothyroidism normally involves
elevations ofbothestrogen andadrenalin.Ihaveknownwomenwhodeveloped
scleroderma afterbeginning theuseof
estrogen, andwhoarereluctant tostop,
becausetheybadbeentoldthatestrogen
wouldprotectthemfromosteoporosis and
heartdisease. Menwhohavehada
diagnosis ofsclerodenna havetoldme
thatwiththeuseofthyroid and
magnesium supplements, Epsomsalts
baths,andtopicalprogesterone and
vitaminE,theirsymptoms regressed.
Polymyositis sometimes leadsto
calcification, andthiswouldbeexpected
iftheproblem isrelatedtomitochondrial
respiration, asisnowgenerally thought
tobethecase;thyroidandmagnesium
areoftenthefactorsneededtonormalize
mitochondria andpreventcalcification.
Tumoral calcinosis issometimes
treatedasavariantofscleroderma, butit
isverydifferent, andtendstobelocalized,
without internal complications. Ithink
manypeoplegetminorbonyescrescences
(bonespurs,osteopbytes, exostoses,
hyperostoses) duringpuberty, oratother
timesofhonnone imbalance, whichonen
disappear spontaneously, butthis
probably represents tbesamebasic
process,andwouldhaveverylittletodo
withthesevereoxygendeficiency states
inwhich collagen synthesis is
overstimulated. Growth hormone and
prolactin imbalances havebeensuspected
tohavearoleinsomeofthesegrowths.
(Bothofthesepituitary hormones are
elevated byestrogen, andhypothyroidism
isoftentheeause.)Progesterone, thyroid,
bromocriptine, andotherthingsare
available tonormalize thepituitary, when
thatisresponsible.
Aweakened abilitytooxidatively
produce energy canleadtothe
maladaptive over-production ofcollagen,
porphyrins, andredbloodcell•.
Considered together. Ithinkthe
mechanisms involved inthesediseases
arguefortheimportance ofthe
nutritional-environmental approach to
healthcare.Themedica1lbureaucratic
pnfennce fora-genetic- rationale for
diseasehasovertones of·eugenics: \'Vhen
thestategetsinvolved ingeneticl,
eugenics, ormedicine, theyhadbetter
keeptheirownscientific standards at
leastashighasthosetheydemandofthe
peopletheydisagree with.
RayPeat,Ph.D.
RayPeat'sNewsletter
P.O.Box5764
Eugene,Oregon97405USA
TOWNSEND LZTTUI_DOCTOAS ..PATlENTS- APRIL1_"
