Immunity, Hormones
andYeastInfections
Thetwohonnones. estrogen andcortisone,
areassociated WIthstress,withrespiratory
changes andWIthchangeS intheimmune
system,
Arecentreviewarticleb)'C.JGrossm3.n
(SCI61lCt. ~ov.30.198-1)outUnes theeffectsof
estrogen ontheimmune system. Estrogen
causesatrophy oftheth~·mus.anddepresses
thecltt:ulattng levelsofth~'mosin 3.lphaone.
whenestrogen ISgJ\'entoca.strated rats.their
!joI'rumhu"amarked inhibllol')' effectonT­
cellfunction:' and"~trogen andandrogen act
maml)'tosuppress theceil-mediated immune
system:' Estrogen Increases antibody produc·
tKln.whichISnotnecessanly helpfulInC'On'
ditionssuchascandidiasIS andcancetEstl"Ogt"n
retards:skingr.sftreJection, andthisprobabl)'
indicates howparasites Willbehandled.
Anespecl3U~' important effectofestrogen
IsII..!reduction oftheamounlof19Aoandbod)'
secreted atmt"mbranes-this isvt"rylikelyto
bethereLlOnforthehighmrnl.ence ofvagJnal
yeutInfections premenstrually anddurmg
pregnancy. Thyroid andprogesterone bothIn­
creasethesecretion ofIg.;\,andthesehor·
monesarefrequently defiCient premenstrual·
lyandinpregnancy"
AllergyandepUepsy consistofhyperactlvl"
tyof,respecll\"el)', immune cellsandnerve
cells.LowceUular energy,caused b~'hypogly·
cemiaorhypoxia, causes h)'~roctivily ofan)'
celltype:theelt5iest waytoob,ser\"e this
phenomenon isinthedelayed rel3.lUtion ofa
hypothyroid person's Achilles renex.ora
dela)'edrepolanzation wa\'eIntheelectrocar·
diogram, Estrogen interferes withcellular
energyInmanyway$.Including aC'Ontnbutlon
tonypox.ia byimpairing oX)'genabsorption.
Thyroid. prog~terone. andpregnenolone help
tononnalize bloodsugarbylmpro\'mg respll'a­
tion.andshouldbethebasICtreatment ror
alletgles. {
Sometun81havebeenfoundtorespond to
thehuman sexsterOIds. estrogen and
teslOsterone, andthereisevldence foracor
I!costerold rectptor mCandida(0.5l.oose.n
aL)suggesting thatIhe)·ea.stproduces and
responds 10ahormone re5embtlng cortisone
Estradiol. themostpowerful humaneSirogen.
hasbeenextr3cted fromayeut(A.Burshell,
tlat.19&./.).
rotm:anv\·ears.malebeerdrinkers have
beenkno":n'todevelop bn:>asts. Sincelh'er
damagecau!jol'sabnormal amounts ofeSlrogen
tobeproduced andretamed, lhe3.lcoholwas
blamed, butmthelastyear.enoughestrogen
wasfoundinbeerandWinetoaccount forlhe
condition, mdep.mdentl~' ofanyalcohol
damage totheh\·er.Breadwas:alsofoundto!
comamsigmficant amounLs ufeSlro~en. from
theyeast.{TheIncreased l"J.teofc:an,'er'"h,l'h
n;\!ibeenob"tl'\"td Inbeerdnnl<el'1l nuJo:.hthn','
Ylmethtn~ todowah"Slrollen. It"ouldbeUI
tere!tln'l tocompa"" lheC'1ncerlnclllenCI'
amonll b~arlt':Ilelli","htheIflcl<!encl' In1"'"
pl,_wht!"'llltOMlila""p:t.>la'rpotalfl"''' I
,-,II,,,,,,..f,,"1','"_'--Thyroid, progesterone
andpregnenolone help
tonormalize bloodsugar
byimproving respiration,
andshouldbethebasic
treatment forallergies.byRayPeat,RayPeatsNewsletter
Inunderstanding candidiaSIs, twothings.
relatedtoeachother,areofspec131impor'
tance:theinvolvement oftheendocrine
Sl-'lltem,andthesupp~ion ofnaturaJimmuni­
ty.Similarendocnne andImmune problems
canoccurInotherSItuations: cancer,agmg,
\'iralInfections. andchemical poisonmg.
Damaged cellularrespmllton appears tobethe
common mechanism. Askintest.usmgCan·
didaantigen.huedontheunIVersal exposure
andacquired immune reactIVIty toIt.shows
aSimilarlackofresponseinbothsystemIC can­
didiaslspatients andIncancerpatlents. ina
stud)'ofcancerpatients. nutritional sup'
ple:mentaDon mcrea.soed skmreaeu\'lt)' andsur·
V1\'3.I._~rdmg toR.A.Cox,anergyoftheceil·
mediated immuruty andaT<elldefiCIency are
foundinchronic mucocutaneous carodidlUl5.
In1860,Trous.seau saidthatcarodidfasts IS"the
localexpression ofa\~rybad Stat~ofthe
wholesystem:' Similarobseryations ha\"ebeen
maderegarding cancerandtuberculosis.
A.nother surpn5lng s'milant)' between can­
didiasISandcancer ISthatthelInnbody reac­
tionmightbehannfuJ. ratherthanhelpful...v:.­
comingtoOi:unood. ''high 1e\~1sofspecifkan·
tifungal antibodies maysometimes blockortn­
hiblttht"dt\~lopment ofcell·mediated 1m·
munltytom)'c'Ost"~C
Simplified IdeasoftheImmune systemwere
foslered bythesu«tSSorvaCCination agalflSt
cenamdi5ea.!itS. andbythepreference ofmost
researchers forclearlydefined slngle-!e\"el
mecharusms. Influences fromtheen\'IrOnment,
nutntion. hormones. andbiological rhythms
maketheproblem morecomplex. butfewpe0­
plehaverecognized theImportance ofnon­
specific Immunlt)' andtheorganlSm's general
reSIStance. EarlyInthiscentury. lighttherapy
wasrecogmzed tobeeffective fortuberculOSIs.
Coley's tOXinSWert'another earlyandsuc·
cessful attempt toslimulate theLmmune
5yStem. W.EKoch.working inGombcrg's lab
withfreeradicals. postulated thatfreeradical
oxidallon wascentralton3.tIImlreSIStance to
mfecllon andcancer. SimIlar ideaswere
de\'cloped b)'AlbertStem-Gyorg}·l. andman~'
othef:lcontnbuted supponllll{ eVlrlCnfe forthe
Importance ofrespmulOn mreSlSlance 10
dL....a",('-Otto \\"artmr.t. \laxCler-on. :Il'<l8n...la
flames. for..xampl..Homeopathy, Connnuedjrom Page271--,-------------------------------------~
ofthedoctorandhisstaffInelicmng com'
p~hensl\~ andoomplete Infonnauon fromthe
pauent. Anyex~nence-phy'Sical emotional
ormenal-plays apartmthehealthcol'lchuon.
Thelndlvldual's Iustor\'constitutes Lmportant
information. notJU5tphYSIcal ills.butalsoIll"
ingcircumstances.
AweU-ilrganued patientwhop~pare5 Ul!01'
mationpriortoamvingatthedoctor's office.
anda.....ell·trained staffthatensUre5theInfor·
mationiscomplete. willenablethedoctorto
spendhistimewiththepallentelUCIdating the
nuances andsubtleties that.....ilIhelphim
matchtheoonditions observed intheillpatient
withthosegivenInhomeopathic references as
causedbyparticular substances.
Thefundamental references forthis
matching processaretherepertory andIhe
matena medica. Therepertol)' followsafor·
matthatlisl..!partSofthebodyandthesymp­
tomsaMQClated withthem.plusdescriptions
ofmentalandemotional states.Witheach
observed conditIOn appears thenameofone
ormo~homeopathic medicines knownto
cau.5etho5esymptoms inahealth)· ~rson.The
phYSiCian thenproceeds totistthenamesof
relevant rnedicmes associated ..,theachsymp­
tomuntilhehascollecled acomprehensive
profileofasmanyofthepatient'S symptoms
aspossIble.. Then.hemillitobserve whichof
thehomeopathic medictnes occurmostfre­
quently, andusehisintUItion toselectthe
medicine mostlikelytoactastheSlmilimum
totheperson's condition.
Generally, thismethodical approach approx,
imatestheidealmorethanthea\'erage work
upforapatient,Afterall,therearemorethan
2000homeopathic medicines~ Itisusually
followed InItsentirety only.....ithchroniccon·
dition.!,ratherthanacute.foracuteconditions.
anumber ofmedicines willsharecommon
symptoms andareknown a.s"polycre5I..!:'
The!lewillencourage thebodyandaccelerate
thecessation ofdl.scomforting symptoms. What
Isbestaboutthehomeopathic altematlve: no
sideeffectsandnosenseof"drugging:'
Homeopathic medicines marketed as"com­
binations" area\-ailable inhealth/natural food
stores.Generally, thebottlecamesalabelfor
aparticular symptom picture. suchasSOre
throat.varicose \'ems.etc..andconsistsofa
groupofpol)'cre5u' sometimes uptoSIX
together andalwa)'liinlowpotency. Higher
pollmcies usuall)'comeintopia)'whenthe
symptom pICtureisclearandthesimillmum
seemsapparent.
Theotherfundamental reference forthe
ph~'SIC.Ia1\'s useISthematenamedica.Thistype
reference ~tsthemedicine, orsubstance. and
thesymptoms associated WIthil..!actionina
healthyperson.IIisthedocumentauon ofthe
"pmvmgs" described abo\·e.Infact.the
matenll medica!joI'rv"asthebasisforthe
repertory, .longWiththec1imcalexpenences
ofthecompiling physiCl3n.
1I0wtogetstarted?
Currently, noaccredited medicalschoolsof·
ferCOUl"Se:'Iinhomeopathy. Ho"'ever.: anumber
ofInstitutions andindividuals dooffercourses
forphysicians thatcanenablethemtointro'
ducehomeopathic techniques aOlImedicines
intoprocllce onagradual, progressive tla815.
In:Iddition, mllnygoodbookswnttenbyprac·
tltioncrsfor prnctltioners eXl5t.
forfurthermformatlon onwhattoreadand
on8tudyopportUnities, conlacc UnitedStales
Homeopathic ASSOCI311on: 5305LeeHighway:
Arhm{ton VA22207:(703)5.14·2r.oo
RJ71r1fl/#'lf)mltl A.\lERlC. ..\"NllO~lEOp ....nl'r
Co"~uml!'r Edition, fehrual')'. mR4------
jImmunity, Co'III"...td/"""Pbgt'~73
SinceearlyInthiscenlun', breweD' yean
wasusedfortreatmg diabfotes. Thepancreas
hasaneStrogen ~pIOr. andestrogen pro'
motesInsulin ~retion. Sincereading of
yeasts'mpon.sivene5l!l tosexhormones. .bout
15yelU3ago.Ihaveencouraged peopletouse
liverwhentheyneedavItamin· mInerai sup­
plement. andtorestriCttheuseofbrewers'
yeastltUIinlytothetreatment ofdiabetes.
Besidespeoplewhoaredebilitated fromStar­
VIl.tion,drugtreatment, oroldage,themain
groupswhohaveahighincidence ofCandida
infection arediabetics, pregnant women. and
premenstrual women. Rosalinde HurleylIsUi
susceptible conditions. including Infancy,
severeinfections, leukemia andotherdefectll
incell·medlated immunity, andendocrine
dl.sease;sheabomentions thattheunhealthy
skinnearulcersisoftencolonIZed byCandida.
Ahighglucoseconcentration Inbodyfiuids
wouldbeanobvious factorilldiabetics. and
insomepregnant women. butbloodsugar
tendstobelowpremenstru&Uy. !olanydlabedcs
ha\~high le\~lsofcortisone. artdsomewomen
doinpregnancy orpremenstrually, butthe
cor\Sl.5tent feature ofpregnancy andthe
premenstlUal panoftheC)'Cleisanincreased
production ofthesexsteroids.
Sinceprogesterone usedtobecalled.the
"lutealhonnone:' manydoctorshavewrol\8­
Iyusoc:lated itwithmanypremenstrual
evenlS, Including waterretention. MNt
medicaltertbooks makethesamemistake.The
corpusluteum secretes bothestrogen andpro­
gesterone. andwl\enthepenonisunderstresl,
progesterone production fails.whileestrosen
secretion continues. Prosesterone defiCiency
andestrosen excessveryoftenoccurInthe
"lutealphase:'premenstrually, artdinpregnan­
CY.andatmenopause. withsymptoms suchas
edema,emottonal disturbances. bloodclotting
problems. andallergysymptoms. Ithinkthis
misconception. thatprogesterone is"theluteal
phasehonnone;' ratherthantheoftendefi­
cientprotective hormone, iswhatcausedDr.
Trusstowarnagainstitsuseincandidia.sis pa·
t!enlS,(Sincem05tdoctorspreseribe synthetic
pro~ withestrogenic andandrogenic $ide
effects.insteadofnawraJprogesterone. Truss's
warning ha.sprobably helpedsomewomento
escapethatmaltreatment.) Because ofitsef­
f~tsonIgA.onbloodsugarandtheallergiC
reaction. andonthebody'sresponse tostress.
natun-Iprogesterone wouldseemtobeoneof
themostusefulmatetialS intreating
candidia.sls.
Inthefungiwhichrespond tothehumansex
nerokts. th~hormones function assexhor,
moM:!,orassexpheromones-they attractthe
appropnate celltype.whilecausingchanges
inthecellswhIchprepare themfor
conjugation.
Incellculture. virulent stramsofCandida
...·erefoundtoadheretocell"fromhuman
membranes. whilenon·vltUlent strainsdidn't
adhere. Abo.thevirulent formsofyeast
adhered tocellstakenfromsomepeople,and
didn'tsticktocellsfromotherpeople.Evenin
vilmV8gt11alepithelial cel.l.sweremoreattrac·
tivetoCandida-more yeastsadhered-when
cell,wen:fromdiabetics. pregnant women, or
womennearmenstruatlon. Thisstrongly sug·
gest.,thatglucoseisnotthereg\llating faCtor,
sincetheglucosewouldbest.:uldantized inthe
cuiturefluid.!>lorelikelyfactorsareestrogen.
conlsone. theabsenceofanIronbInding pro­
I('m.or ofboundantibodIes: hypoxia causes
lIIcre~ cellularconcentr3t1on orfreefatly
aCid!!.sothL'I1'1:mot!1l'r Pll'iSlble factor.Theobvious nextupenment willbeto
pretreat bothyeastanddonorcellsWIth
estrogens andotherhonnones including cor­
tisoneandtestosterone. toseel!VIrulence can
beinduced.
Estrogen andconisone arethingswhichsup­
pressthehost'simmunit}'. andwhIChappear
tomodifythefungus.T\t.·oother thin~....hICh
haveinteresting connectio'>ns ....ithestrogen.
cansuppress Immulllty andstimulate yeast
growth: unsaturated fattyacidsandexcess
iron.Diamond ha.ssuggested thatthereason
candidiasis oftenoccursinleukemia isthehigh
Ironlevelinthatd.isease;othel1lhavesuggested
thatleukemia itselfmightbecausedbyanex'
cessofiron.blocking theimmune system.Iron
(andhighlevebotzine.I.e.,IOmM)stimulate
theformation ofmycelia(HuenandCutler.
1983).
Ina10.....oxygenenvtrOnment. ul\Saturatf'd
fattyacidscanstimulate )'eastgrowth (~es.~
a1.,198-1),andthe}'suppress Lntmulllt}· in
\'ariousways.
Besides adirecteffectoncellular immuni·
ty,unsaturated fltryacidsinterfere with
thyroidfunction andwithmitochondrial res­
piration. Lowth)'roidleadstohighestrogen.
Estrogen (andlowthyroMf)cause increased ab­
sorption ofiron.Atanextreme POlllt.excess
irondisturbs severalenGocrine glands.butat
amoremoden-te level.Itblockscellular im­
murnty. Combined Withunsaturated fatt)­
acids..ironStlmulates peroxldatlon. withtox·
iceffect$,including theformation ofcarbon
monoxide. inhibiting respiration, Vitanun C.
stimulates theab$Orption ofImn.andcanalso
increase therateofperoxide formation. Ina
specialdiseaseofIronretention. idiopathk
hemochromatosis. vitaminCwa.sfoundnotto
increase iron~ciorl whentestedbyitself,
thoughItdidincrease theeffectofadrugcall·
eddefenioxamine (D.Conte.tt01..Acta
Haematol. (Basel)72(2),117-l20. 19841.
Themitochondria arenotonlythesiteof
respiratory energyproduclion, butarewhere
cholesterol isconvened topregnenolone.
whichisthenconvened toprogesterone and
DHEA.Thesesteroids.ll appeartoprotectthe
respiratory system. ThisrespLratory protection
isprobably partofwhitSelyecalledthe
"catatolUC"' function, thefactthatcenllln
steroids. especially pregnenolone. protect
OrgalllSrns againstagrelt\..netyofPOISOns.
Whether itisanexogenous chemIcal. ora
poisonproduced byInl~stinal organISms. ora
toxICeffectofdamage toonesowntISSue,
whichismakingapt'l1lOnsick.itwouldseem
reasonable touseaprotecth·e. "catatoxic;'
material suchaspregnenolone aspanofthe
supportive therapy. fiber.ox}1iendnnks.and
aspirincanprotecttheoowel.
M)'firstexpenments wuh),east..~rewuh
theKochreagents. butthenIgotIf\te~ted in
testl1lgpossibleanti·iron substances. Caffeine,
1suspect, usesthatmechalllsm. among othe~
Ihavealsoexpenmented withessential oib,
cloveoil.thymol.andmenthol. andelemen­
talsulfur.whichisprobabl)' theleasttoxic
therapyformanyfungusinfections oftheSkill,
vagma. and bow~l.Ume-sulfur andother
sulfurmixtures havealonghistory as
fungicides. Saturated fattyacidsgenerally m­
hibit fungal growth.Shonchainllcids.suchas
acetie.bClLe.proPIOIlle. andcaprylic aCIdshaw
oftenbeenusedasantl·fungals. ande\·tnthe
longerchamsaturated fattyaCIdsha\·ebl"t'n
te:lted.
Larged~of\'U3nlln Aand polas.~lum
IlXhdehawl'ot"t"nu-<'d. ~parall'ly andml:"lhNtopromote generaJlmmulllt)', andalsoto.treal
fungusInfections: Isuspectthataneffectof
theIodideistoprotect agaInStthetoxICityof
theuruatun-ted fatl)'acids.
Thiosulphate isanother formofsulfurthat
hasbeenusedforskinfungal inf~tions. !olin)'
herbaldrugscontain qUlllones andsapolllns.
whichareaCU\'eagamstfun!p.butwhIChan
bedangerous tothepatient. Theimidazoles
canbedangerous. because theyblocksteroid
synthesis inthepanentaswellasinthefungus.
:-;ystatln isabobelieved toactonfungal
sleroids. and i~canbetoxictothepatient.but
itisconsldell!d thebesttreatment foradead­
lysystemic infection (e.g.,lungs.hean,
kidneys). Desensitization withCandida \..ceine
andtreatment withimmune rabbitsel'\lmare
dbc:us.sed inR.Dubos's book. Bac~"ol and
.\fycoclt:;lrifev;tionsofMan.Boncadd(5"').&no
lihistamllles. andmanyotherchemicals have
someanti·fungal actl\"it~·. bute.'l:ceptforsulfur.
Ithinllthebestapproach IS10optimIZe thepa­
tlent'sresistance.
RailPeat"/\'t1L's!etter, P.O.Box3427.Eugene.
OR97403.
ChiliesChase
Chills
Withaheading, "Chilies ChaseChills;'anar·
ticleinthefebruary, 1983.Amtncon Htalch I_
magazine encouraged itsreaderstoeatSPICY I
foodforhealthenhancemenl. Dr.IrwinZI·
ment,Professor ofMedicine atU.C.L.A" In·
dlcatesthatbysumulating mucusflow.spices
canhelpprevent andlreatrespLtatory pro­
blemssuchasa.nhma, bronchitis. sinUSitis and
colds.
Or.Zimentsays,.'''Thereasonmostpeople
...·IthchronIC lungdisease h&\'eproblems is
because abnormal mucous.secreuons getstuck
inthelungs.Wewanttostimulaa· Ihelungs
toproduce waterysecretions toloosenthe
mucus IIItheai~'a)'S:' Dr.Zimentdoesntad·
dreSlithepotential causeoftheeXceSlil\'e
mucusproduction. whichcouldbeaunbuted
to.amongotherthings.foodsensltl\'lty
ItisbeUe\-e<! thathotfoodsUT1lateIhe
dlgeSlu·e tn-ct.andcausearenexIIIcrene III
secretlons fromthenmeandlungs."Pfoople
whoeatsPIC)'foodsh&\'elesschrolUCOOSlruC'
twelungdiseasethanpeople .....hodont:'ZI·
mentsays.Herecommends thathISpallents
WIthbronchit15 eatoneSpIC)'mealadar.and
drinklotsofwalet.forthOSl'withG.I.Ir:H'15
lhatcan'thandlesuchzest,Zimentsugsests
ga!'Kling acupofwannWatermIXedWllh10
dropsoftabaseo sauce!
Aromatic herbs.Ingeneral. arebelJt'\'t'd 10
act3.Sapreventall\'e tomany allm~lI1s by11\'
suringmorecomplete a.s:>lmllallon Qffood
nUlrients. BenCharles HarnsInBl'fft'rH;>(I/1h
WithCldj1lClry Ht'rbsnOles."Theherb's
allealine saltscombine ....ithitsaromalLC prlll­
clplt'sor\'olallJeOIlsandwork10conteract the
fatorcat:trrhal·formmg prmnplt's ofman)
(oods:'lienOlesthatIhym...haslonl( be~'n
UM"dInbronchllls w,th:tn a~l'oldrt'pUI:lIIOn
10",Im\"fonhphl,,!Ull:' ;In:lCILOnCOllnrmed
b,'Ihel·.SDI"pt>nsatory
