-tumthecoachintoapumpkin" orvice­
versa.(Perhaps the-Emperor's New
Clothes· wouldbeabetteranalogy?) Iask
theTLfDreadership tonotbefooled.
SteveAustin,N.D.
3207Southeast Twenty-Fifth Avenue
Portland, Oregon97202
References
1.Egger,J.etal.Ismigraine foodallergy?a
double,blind oontrol]ed trialofoligw.ntigenic
diettreatment. Lancd1983;ii:BG5·9.
2.MonroJ,eta1.Migraine ilafood.all<lrg)'
disease.Lolled1984;ii:719-21.
3.Mansfield LE,etal.Foodallergyandadult
migraine: double-blind andmediator
oonfirmation ofanallergicetiology.MlI AJl~rg:y
1985;55:126.9.
4.Spinwebcr CL.L-tryptophaD adminillt.ered
tochronic deep_onletinaomniac.: late·
appearing reduction ofaleeplatency.
P.ydIopkor", 1986;90:151·155.
5.Polletp.Leathwood PD.TheinflucDCC of
tryptophan 00aleepinm&o_lntu'ultJVitNu.lr
Rn1983;53(2):223.
6.Bauman P,eta1.Long·term treatment of
hypoaomnia withL-tryptophan. Ex/Xri~1I1ia.
4l(9);8(abatr).
7.HOITObioDr.Therolcofessential fattyacids
andproataglandins inthepremenatrual
->'Ddrome.J R~prodMuJ1983;28:465 (review).
Recycling Placentas
Editor:
Iwouldlikethatyouletyourreaders
knowthatI'veappreciated alotyourarticle
andthatitmademelaughalot!I'veno
othercomments ....
Tellyourreadersthatiftheywantsome
moreinfannation (onascientific level),I
willnotpublishitanymo.-e inyourjournal,
butIcansendthemiftheywriteme
personally.
Withmybestplacental regards 0.-foetal
regards(asyouprefer...)
Docteur PaulMusarella
96,RuedeMiromesnil
75008Paris
France
OnRecycling Placenlas, Thyroid
Suppression andCarpalTunnel
Editor:
Iamgladtoseeyourcomment,
"Recycling Placentas," intheJuneissue.
Moresuchdialogue between authorsand
editorscouldmakethemagazine more
interesting. Lastmonth,Idecidedtowait
Townsend Lc:tcrforDoctof5Augusv'Septembcr 1990toseewhether otherswouldcomment on
Musarella's statements. Sinceyour
comments coveredmanyofthe pointsthat
neededlobemade,rdjustliketoaddsome
ofmyotherreactions.
Usually, theauthorsoffoolishmedical
claimsatleasthavetheslightvirtueof
pushing common errorstoanabsurd
extreme, helpingtomake thoughful people
moreconscious ofaproblem theyhadn't
beenpayingattention to.Butthereare
suggestions inMusarella's articlethat
threaten tobesmirch goodreseareh. Idon't
knowwhat"Pr."mightstandfor,but
Filatov isgrammatically masculine
(Filatova wouldbeawoman's name),and
inRussian medicine, thephrase"the
Russian scientist Pilatov'" wouldbe
assumed torefertoVladimir Filatov,after
whomatleastoneFilatovInstitute has
beennamed. Vladimir Filatov wasa
pioneerinreconstructive surgeryandin
cornealtransplants fromcadavers. He
foundthatcomeas transplanted from
cadavers thathadbeenkeptincoldstomge
forsometimeexertedahealinginfluence
onadjacent tissues.Hesawsimilareffects
inreconstructive surgeryusing'"tube-flaps"
ofskin,andconcluded thattissuu
subjected tostTessful conditions formed
substances whichpromoted healingBnd
regeneration. (Succinic acidandother
dicarboxylic acidswereidentified among
the"biogenic tissuermmulaton.·Succinate
stimulates respiration andsteroid
formation, andprotects against
peroxidative damage. Filatov's workisan
important complement tothatof
Engelhardt andSzent-Gy6rgYi Bnd
Polezhaev andMeerson.) Because
abscesses onenfonnedwhenvitaltissue
wasimplanted, Filatov triedsterilized
tissue,andfoundthatitwasaseffective in
stimulating healingandregeneration. At
thispointherealiudthattissueextracts
wouldhavethesameeffects,andhemade
andusedextracts fromagreatvarietyof
"stressed tissues: including leaves.He
published resultsshowing thatsterile
extracts couldstimulate regeneration of
theopticnerve,andorvariousothertissues.
ManyyearsaRerhedied.,peopleatthe
FilatovInstitute foundthatextract. of
placentas wereextremely beneficial toold
people.
IfthereisaNewFilatovwhorejectsthe
conclusions ofV1adimir Filatov,anduses
vitalplacental tissue,inacaricature ofthe
experiments attheFilatovInstitute, Paul
Musarella certainly owesusan
explanation, because hisphrase, "the
Russian scientist Pilatov· ismisleading.
ButIthinkMusarelln ismorelikelyjustanother personexploiting thegullible
public,whoarejustifiably impatient with
thefailureofthemedicalestablishment to
workseriously onproblemsoragingand
regeneration.
Although theTLfDdeliberately avoids
filtering outcrazyideas,Ithinkatiny
editorial noteattheendorsucharticles
wouldbeappropriate, commenting for
exampiethatnoreferences weresubmitted,
thattheidentity of"Pr.Pilatov'" wasn't
explained, andpossiblygivingalittlemore
information abouttheauthor.
Thyroid Suppression
IntheJune ~tters" section,thereis
aninteresting discussion between Mona
Morstein andJ.Collin,withbothassuming
thattherehasn'tbeendearresearch on
theissueofthyroidsuppression.ltil easy
foranexcessof exogenous thyroidhormone
tosuppress theglanduntilthereisno
detectable endogenous thyroidhormone
formed(usingradioactive tracers),butthe
important pointisthatinnannalpeoplea
totallyluppressed thyroidfunction takes
onlytwoorthreedaystoreturntonormal
whentheIUppressi vetreatment isstopped.
Inasmallpercentage ofhypothyroid
people,treatment forashorttimewith
thyroid supplementation canstimulate
recovery ofnormalthyroidfunction, by
activating thebrain-pituitary system,
raisingbloodsugarwhichactivates the
liverenzymesystemthatproduces Ta,and
bylowering theanti-thyroid strus
hormones. Without usingradioactive
material, itiseasytovisualize theprocess
ofsuppression: veryobviousdepressions
intheneckthyroidregionappearona
thoroughly suppressive dose,andreducing
thedoseforafewdaysrestorel theneck
contour. Thisveryrapidadaptation ofthe
gland'sanatomy andfunctiontoexogenous
thyroid isnecessary, because ofthe
ilTegularity ofourconsumption ofthyroid
substance inanatural diet.Untilthis
century, everyone atethethyroidinvarious
smallanimals, andwestillgetsomein
milkandshellfish andafewexoticfoods.
'I'heissueisdifferent withthyroxin, T4.
ThebulkofouractiveT3hormone is
produced intheliver,aspartofaquickly
adaptive systemforadjusting themetabolic
raleinrelation tonutritional status,but
thepituitary isalsoabletoconvertT4to
T3,andahighlevelofT4willcause
suppression ofTSHsecretion, evenifthe
liverisfailingtoproducetheactiveTa,as
..
inaging,stress,cirrhosis, andvariousother
diseases. Thyroxin canliterally make
hypothyroidism worse.Inthiscaseyou
havesuppression withoutacompensating
absorption ofactivehormone.
Although alittlethyroidsubstance isa
nonnaldietaryfactor,anddigestion ofthe
glandular colloidconverts theproteininto
thehormones inthesamekindofprocess
thatoccursinnormalsecretion fromthe
livinggland,ragreewithMorstein thatit
isimportant torestorethegland'snonnal
function asfarasthatispossible. Ithink
manyofhersuggestions derivefromthe
endocrinology courseItaughtatNCNM in
the1970's,butIthinksomeofthedetails
arewrong.Normalizing thethyroidisnow
aprettywelldefinedphysiological process,
andthebiggestproblem isideological,
ratherthantechnical. ManycuIturalforces,
especially thedrugcompanies, havemade
ithardforpeopletodiscuss thyroid
endocrinology.
CarpalTunnelSynd.rome -Or,write
SickHandScam?"
Whenaphysician chooses themost
profitable diagnostic andtherapeutic
approaches toahealthproblem, itislikely
tobeconsidered fraudulent ifthedoctoris
achiropractor, butnotifthedoctorisa
surgeon. Ifanaturopath tellsyouthatbed
restisthebesttreatment foraruptured
spinaldisc,surgeons willwarnyouabout
thedangenofquackery, buttheresearch
clearlyshowsthat,forsafetyandefficacy,
surgeryisdistinctly inferiortobedrest.
Therearemanyothercasesinwhichdoing
nothing, orusingamoreconservative
treatment, i.clearlysuperior tothe
standard medicalorsurgical treatment,
butthemedicalindustry haslearnedhow
tocontrolpublicopinionbymanipulating
themassmedia.
Byconsulting withthousands ofwomen
whobelieved theyhadahormone
imbalance ofsomesortthattheir
physicians couldn'tidentify, Ibegantosee
several clusters ofsymptoms that
responded immediately toarational
nutritional andhormonal anti-stress
program. Oneoftheseclusters mightbe
calledSubtleConstellation ofAbsorbed­
Mucoprotein-related signsandsymptoms,
orpossiblysub-clinical myxedema, though
neithertennislikelytobewidelyadopted
inthemedicalcommunity.
Womenareseveraltimesmorelikely
thanmentohave~hyroiddisease: simplybecause estrogen tendstoblockthyroid
function. Estrogen-induced thyroidhypo­
function canbecompensated tosome
degreebyvarioushormonal alljustments;
elevated secretion ofadrenalin andcortisol
arecommon. \Vhenthecompensation is
inadequate, therewilloftenbe
hypoglycemia andatendency toformtoo
muchhistamine. Toomuchadrenalin will
causecoldhandsandfeet,toolittlewill
causeorthostatic hypotension (blacking
outwhenyoustanduptooquickly) and
bowelspasms, forexample.
Variouswater.binding glycoproteins are
formedundertheinfluence ofhonnonesor
stress,butwhatever proteins areinthe
blood,including albumin, willshowup
outsidethebloodvessels,around thetissue
cells,whenthebloodvesselsbecomeleaky.
Lowthyroid, highestrogen, andhigh
histamine areknowntoincrease the
permeability ofbloodvessels.
Patients whohavemyxedema typically
havemitralvalveprolapse, andatautopsy
itcanbeseenthatthevalveisthickened
intoajelly.like mass.Manywomenwith
thepremenstrual syndrome haveamitral
valveheartmurmur premenstrnally, but
notatothertimesofthemonth.Thejelly
C811befonnedandremoved fairlyquickly.
Oldtextbookson thethyroidglandoften
listedemphysema asasymptom of
myxedema. Whenratsaregivenalarge
injectionofestrogen, theoxygenation of
bloodintheirlungsissharplydecreased in
lessthananhour.Although itisnot
commontotestoxygen diffusion inhumans,
Iknowoftwowomeninthe&arnefamily
whoshowedverypoorpulmonary oxygen
diffusion aftertheywereputoohighdoses
ofestrogen. (Sineeest:rogen inhibitsthyroid
secretion,811dhypothyroidismisassoclated
withelevated estrogen, theyshouldbe
considered together.) Leakage ofproteins
fromcapillaries inthelungsisprobably
responsible forthedecreased diffusion, by
thickening thelayerthrough whichthe
oxygenmustdiffuse.
Whenmyxedema existsinchildhood,
thecartilage injointsswells,andis
deformed, causingacharacteristic knock­
kneedappearance. Inmilderfonn,the
swelling cancausejointpainthatdoesn't
involvethecharacteristic inflammation of
arthritis. Inamildfonn,thecalfmuscles
tendtoswellafterprolonged activity; the
-growing pains·thataTesocommon around
thebeginning ofpubertyareprobably the
resultofatemporary hypothyroid edema
ofthelegmuscles.
Whenatendonswells,itissometimes
theresultofalocalinjuryorofaparticular
over·use ofamuscle,andinthesecaseslocaltreatment cansometimes producen
permanent cure.Butwhentheproblem
keepsrecurring, orkeepsshowing upin
different areas,thereisprobably ageneral
hormonal problem.
Whenatendoninthewristswells,it
cancausenumbness inthehand,by
pressing onanervewhichpassesthrough
thecarpaltunnelwithsometendons. The
tunnelisformedbyaligament thatholds
thetendonsinplace,andswelling ofthe
ligament itselfcancontribute to
compression ofthenerve.Eventhe
connective tissuethatfonnsthenerve
sheathitselfcanswell.Manypeoplewith
undiagnosed hypothyroidism complain
thatthey"havepoorcirculation,· andthat
theirhandsandfeetgotosleepeasily.I
thinkthesearetwoseparate (butrelated>
problems. Lowthyroidpeopleoftenhave
coldhandsandfeet,andtheyoftenhave
nervesthatareover-sensitive to
compression. Pooroxygenation isinvolved
inedema,bothascauseandconsequence
butswelling cancausecompression and
nerveinjuryinawaythatisexacerbated
bycertainpostures orrepetitive actions,
andthiscompression canberelieved by
surgery. Butifthetissuewassusceptible
toswellingbecauseofthegeneralhormonal
environment, otherproblems willfollow.
Pinched nervesandarthritis commonly
followtreatment ofthecarpaltunnel
syndrome bysurgery orlocalcortisone
injections.
RayPeat
P.O.Box3427
Eugene, Oregon97403
OnlyVeryGoodTestersShouldbe
SelectedforTests,NolJust
Anyone
Editor:
ThankyouforyourletterofApril16th
1990,regarding theVEGAtest·Method. It
wouldbehelpfulforeverybody concerned
ifyoupublishthefollowing intheTownund
LetterforDoctors:
TheVEGAtest-Method1wasdeveloped
fromtheElectro-Acupuncture according
toVolPInsteadofmeasuring theskin
resistance onorgan-related acupuncture
pointse.g.liver,kidneys etc.,inthe
VEGAtest-Me thadorganam paulesoniver,
kidneysetc.inpotencies of04andlower
areplacedinthemeasurement circuitand
measurements aremadeononesuitable
pointonly-connective tiuue.1•
'56 To....nsendLetlerforDoctors AugulllJScpt~mber 1990
