MoreLetters
Progesterone Content
Corrected
Editor:
BurtonGoldberg's articleonfibroids
(January, 2000)onpage90indicates
thatAeronLifeCydes labreported the
progesterone conLentofProgest·E
Complex 88beingbetween 1,000and
1,500mg.perounce.Iwastoldacouple
ofyearsagothatthisfigurewas
misLakenty introduced intoJohnLee's
bookbythebook'seditors.Thatproduct,
madeundermypatent,basnever
deviated fromitslOllprogesterone
content, soitcontains 2,850mgof
progesterone perounce,andtdon't
knowofanytestthathasfound
otherwise. AsIunderstand it,Dr.Lee's
bookwaslatercorrected.
Raymond Peat
P.O.Box5764
Eugene, Oregon98405USA
Email:raypeat@efn,org
Evidence Links
VirusesandBacteria
toGallstones
Editor:
Ireadwithinterestyourexcellent
publication andwouldliketocomment
onthearticle"Mounting Evidence Links
VlrU.Se8andBacteriatoEverything from
CancertoGallstones- inOctober 1999
issue(pa.ge 39).Iforwardanarticlefrom
myhealthinformation coursewhich
yourreadersmayfindinteresting. Any
references toitbeingacoursearticle
couldbeomitted asitmakesafree
standing itemalso.
Thetoxicstateoftissueisofprimary
importance whether incancerorgall
stones(twoitemsmentioned inarticle
heading). Without dehydration, gall
stonescannotfonnandIbelievethat
thecommon factorsinallchronicill
healtharedehydration, toxicityand
chemical (nutritional) imbalance.
Bacterial clean-up isaresult,nota
cause,ofsuchadry,toxicandnutrient­
imbalanced state.Ofcourse,individual
constitution andtoxic/nutritionalhistorymakenealssary theevaluation
ofeachpersononanindividual basis.
Ifindtheauthor's comments most
interesting andifthesearesooninthe
lightofbeingtheresultandnotcause
ofWness,thisworkwouldcomplement
worksofpeoplelikeB~champ, Lida
Mauman andmanyotherswhoalso
identifymicrobes atthesiteofM.tjsaue
activity.~
Theherbshementioned aremost
interesting andbeneficial inthatthey
aidtissuedetoxification andimmune
capacity andtherefore enhance and
shorten thetasksof'pathogenic'
microbes. Iagreealso,thatthequality
ofherbisofvitalimportance.
Thephilosophies ofPasteurversus
B~champ areamostimportant
fundamental foundation inthinking
uponwhichtoplaceOleevidenceofwhat
wefind.Inshort,Pasteurbelievedthat
microbes arefromexternal sources,
unrelated totissuestateandneeda
solution fromwithout(i.e.drugs-the
basisofthepharmaceutical industry).
Bechamp believed andprovedthat
microbes originated fromwithin,when
theclimatewastoxic,andreverted to
non-pathogenic microbes whentissue
returned tohealth.Thisphilosophy is
thebasisforhealthandresponsibility.
Pasteur renounced hisbeliefsand
agreedwithBechamp onhisdeathbed,
butthatisnotcommonly knownnor
reported. Bechamp forsomestrange
reason,despitehisimpressive titlesand
works,hasbeenlarelyignored and
deletedfromrecordswhereheshould
havebeenfound.
SomemayaskhowtheAustralian
Barry(?80rrycannotrecallhissurname)
'infected' himselfwithH.pyloriwhenhe
wasidentifying itsasociation with
stomach ulcers.Inmyexperience the
stomach liningisbadlyaffected by
chronic dehydration andmercury
poisoning fromfillings.Iwonderwhat
thisexperiment wouldhaveproduced in
anon-tox.ic (realistically inthe1990's
low-loxic), wellhydrated individual.
SorryBarry-notbeingpersonal- only
discussing theparameters of
possibilities. Howdochildren pickup
'infection' frompeersifthereisno
contagion? Well,thereisanopportunity
to'catchdetoxification agents'ifrelevant
toyourtissue.Resonance isthekey.Why
doonlycertai.nofficestaff'catc:h' theoold
goingaround? Whynoteveryone?
Resistance istheusualunderstanding
butexamining resistance bringsone
backtotheterraintheoryofB6champ.Also,howcansomehaveTB' ofthelung
intheabsenceofthetuberculus bacillus?
IfwearegoingWkeeptothelawsof
goodsciencethen'contagion laws'apply
toall.
Alas,healthforallwouldtopple
society 88weknowit.Thefood
industries, banking andfinance
systems, petro-chemical industry,
pharmaceutical industry andindeed,
government revenueetc.allrelyonthe
premiseofPasteur.
Thesickness industry, massiveand
international, isnothing todowith
health.Iamcertainly notagainstsociety
etc.andthesickness industry offersthe
onlyhelpsomewillaccept- Iamnot
pointing fingersorinvolved incriticism,
butsimplystatethatthechoicefor
healthisindividual andcaDnotbetruly
madeunlessbasedonthenecessary
information (Informed Choice). There
aremanywhodonotchoosehealthand
thatistheirprerogative. Information is
plentiful butputtingittogether in
contexttogetaclearpictureisnoteasy.
Yourpublication servesasanexcellent
foruminthisrespect.
Vivienne Bradshaw, MRNT
Practitioner (AltlNat. Med)
3Maitings Cottages, GonerbyHillFoot
Grantham, Lines.NG31&IF
England
PhoneIFax 01476-567420
Detoxification andIts
Erroneous Labelof
'Infection'
v.Bradshaw 1996@
Inmyexperience ofhelpingpeopleto
resolvetheirheolthproblems, Ihave
encountered uariousattitudes togetting
well.
-Somedesperately wantridoftheir
symptoms butonlyiftheydonothave
tobeinvolved -theyseekthemagic
bulletfromwithout. Iamusually
unabletohelpapersonwiththis
approach.
-Othersareprepared todosome
thingswhichdonotinconvenience
themtoomuch.Thesepeoplemay
receivesomehelp.
•Thereareotherswhoreallydowant
togetwell,areprepared totakeback
theresponsibility fortheirown
healthandseetheirsymptoms asno
longernecessary astheyimplement
changes-someofthemquitedrastic
ones.Thesepeopleembark upona
".TOWNSENO l.E1'TEAtorDOCTORS ......T1EHTS-JlJHE2000
