Dubious Usesof
Paper,Postage and
Reader's Time
Editor.
Yourplanned priceincrease -dueto
recentincreases inpapercostand
postage- raise8asorepointwithme.As
asubscriber since1985,Ihaveafriendly
suggestion.
IwishTLfDPwouldckcnase u&eof
paperandpostage bybeingmore
8E!lective aboutwhatitpublishes. Too
muchofTL/DP isrambling, half-baked,
unreferenced orotherwise oflowuse.
Thisproblem isgettingworse-ormy
patience foritisgoingdown(orboth)­
asthesizeofthemagazine has
expanded overtheyears.TLfDP
becomes les8welcome tomeasittakes
longertosearchthrough thechaff.To
paymoreforlessisdoublyunwelcome.
Iunderstand yourideasaboutpeer
review(July1993,p.740),butforme
theyarenowcolliding withtoomany
pages.
WhatIlikebestahoutTL{DP
inc:ludes literature abstracts withbrief
commentary, newsofmanykinds,brief
hypotheses, andthemorefactual,
thoughtful bookreviews. WhstIlike
leastarewindyessays, overlylong
lettersandinadequate references.
Herearetwoexamples ofdubious
usesofpaper,postageandreaders'time:
1.-Enzyme Therapy. AnEffective
Alternative forMusculoskeletal
Problema,- byAnthony Cichoke, Nov.
1994,p.II83-85. Thefirst90%d.iscusses
thedangersofcorticosteroids, with26
references, butwithnorrumtion 0{tlu
tith8ubject.Thelast10%dealingwith
enzymetherapycitesnotOMreferena.
Yettheauthorooncludes withastraight
facethat"'Enzymes areaprovenand
effective- alternative tosteroids.
2.Articleoncoconutoil,byRayPeat,
June1995.Page156Oastparagraph)
88ys,without references, "Theanti·
obesityeffectofcoconutoilisclearin
alltheanimalstudies.- Intrigued, 1
lookedforsuchstudiesinMedline. I
foundnone.SoIwrotetoPest7weeks
agoaskingforkeyreferences, including
fOl"Iliaadditional claimofcholesterol
Iuwenn&- I'vereceived noreplytodate.Communication andinfonnation are
valuable. Bluster andunreferenced
'"facts-arenot.IwishTL{DPwould
increase theratioofthefirsttothe
second,orprintfewerpages,notmOn!oI
don'thaveunlimited timeforan
unlimited, unselective TLfDP,andI
doubtthatmanypractitioners doeither.
Isuggest youpoDreadersaboutthe
growing sizeofTLfDPandwhatparts
theyvaluemOflt.FormeTL(DPhas
becometoolargetobesounselective.
DonaldRDavis,PhD
Research A8a0ciate
CoDegeofNaturalSciences
TheUniversity ofTeu.satAustin
Experimental ScienceBuilding 442
Austin,Texas78712USA
Fax512-471·5680
d.r.davia@mai.l.utexas.edu
RayPeat,PhD
Replies
Thanksforpassingonthecomments
fromD.R.Davis,PhDIhaven'treceived
hisletteraskingmeforrefen!nces, and
Iassume it'sbecause myMex.ican
addresswaslistedwiththecoconutoil
article.(I'mbackinEugene,Oregon).
Davismentions thathelookedin
Medline forreferences totheanimal
studies Iwroteabout.Practicing
pbysicians, wboputinlongbourswith
theirpatients, andwhoworkinthe
context ofanoftenauthoritarian
profession andanoppressive
bureaucratic culture, needtofindout
inanefficient waywhatother
physiciana aredoing,andtheyprobably
findMed1ine andIndexMedicu.s very
useful.Butforaresearcb scientist
workinginacollegeofnaturalsciences,
inauniversity withagoodlibrary,there
aremoreappropriate waystoaean:h­
especiaUy sinceIemphasized thatsome
oftheworkwasdonemorethan50
yearsago.
Idecidedtotakearandomsampling
ofMedline's information. (Inoticedthat
thelibrary's machine advised that
Medline notbeusedifyouarelooking
forinformation onnon·human animala).
Ilookedattheirentriesfor1984,when!IfoundF.Berscbauer, etai.,
"Nutritional·physiological effectsof
dietaryfatsinrationsforgrowing pigs.
4.Effectsofsunflower oilandcoconut
oilonproteinandfatretention, fatty
acidpattern ofbackfatandblood
parameters inpiglets.-Arch.'J'ienmahr
(EastGermany) 34(1),19-33,1984.(Fat
contentinthecoconutoilfedanimals,
afteronly34days,was15.9%;inthe
control group, 18.6%;andinthe
sunflower oilfedanimals, 21.1%.1
So,IsawthatMedlinedoesinclude
ananimal-nutrition journal, and
decided tocheckanother year.J.
Yazbecb, etal.,"'Effectsofessential fatty
aciddeficiency onbrownadiposetissue
actvityinratsmaintaind atthermal
neutrality.- Camp.Bioch.Physiol. A
(England) 94(2),273-276, 1989,
suggested thattheobserved increase in
restingmetabolic rateproduced byusing
coconutoiltocreateanessential fatty
aciddeficiency, ispartlytberesultof
increased heatproduction inthebrown
adiposetissue.Theweigbtofthatfat
decreased by28%,whileitsabilityto
produceheatincreased 69%.
IfDaviscbecked adata·base that
wasdesigned foranimalresearch, he
couldfindanabundance ofpublications
relevant tothequestonofcoconutoil's
effectonbodyfat.Idon'tknowofany
computerized datasystems forbiology
tbatgoback60years,butmanual
searching oftheprintedsourcesisonly
alittleslowerthantheelectronic
method, andinfinitely moreprecise.
Overtheyears,Ibavenoticedthat
sciencelibraries seemtobeofflimitsto
mostprofessors, 80anyinformation they
cangetfromcomputers shouldbe
significant, butthereliance on
computer·retrieved information putsan
awfulburdenonthepeoplewhochoose
thekeywords.
TheTownsendLetter, especiaUy with
yournewtitle,isobviously ajournalof
viewpoint, andnotoftechnical data.AI.
such,muchofitsfunctionistoclarify
gow.orientations, andbeliefs.and
possibly toencourage peopletohave
moreimaginative. flexible.andcritical
attitudes towardmedicalideas.When
apublication purports tobeobjective
and-scientific," thenthen!isaproblem
withunsupported assertions.IfDa\'U
toknowwhyandwheretogoforfurther
verification.
Foradditionalsubetantiation, please
seeprevious andfutureTownsend
articlesonenzymetherapy, mybook:
Enzymu andEnzymes Therapy: How
toJumpStartYourWaytoLifelong
GoodHealth, andthearticleinthis
issueoftheTownsend LeturforDoctors.
Thefollowing isareferenced rewrite
ofthesection, Enzyme Therapy: An
Alternative CourseofAction,that
appeared onpage1185,TowMtnd Letter
forDoctors, November, 1994:
Euyme Therapy:
AnAlterDative CourseofAction
Inrecentyears,researchers have
offeredalternatives totheuseof
cortisone therapy formusculoskeletal
problems."'" Systemic enzymetherapy
appearstobeaviahlealternative with
noneoftheserioussideeffectssooft.en
notedwithcortisone.1lI
Conservative healthcareand
systemic enzyme therapy canhelp
contain costsandprovide agreater
seoseofpatientsatisfaction.
Enzymes areeffective intreating
various conditions (bothacuteand
chroniC)J',II becausethey:
•InhibitedemaISM
•Activate fibrindegradation-7
•Interactwithprostaglandin
synthesi~
•Degrade complement-adivating
immunecomplexea-71
•Stimulate thefunction of
antibodies7H4
•Improve plasmavi8C08ityal,71.7I,,..71
•Reduceatherogenetic lipids7l,'"
Conclusion
Although adjustments andsoft
tissuetechniques aretheprime
chiropractic tools,theirSUece88 canbe
greaUyinfluenced bymusculoskeletal
andtotalbodyhealth." Cortisone
therapycaninterfere withthebody's
innatecapacity tomaintain healthand
tofigb'dioeue.
Enzymetherapyseemsaviableand
natural alternative incaringfor
musculoskeletal prohlems when
compared totheseriousandlong-term
sideeffeetsofcortisone. Enzymes area
provenandeffective toolthatshouldbe
implemented hypracticing alternative
~Enzyme Therapy:
AnEffective
Alternative For
Musculoskeletal
Problems
Editor.
Inresponse toDonald R.Davis,
Ph.Do'sletterIwouldliketoofferthe
following comments.
Areviewofmyarticle("Enzyme
Therapy: AnEffective Alternative for
Musculoskeletal Problems") indieat.ea
thathisstatement regarding alackof
references intheenzyme therapy
section ofthatarticleiscorrect.
Somehow, thereferences which
subatantiated enzymetherapydidnot
appearinthatarticle.Ihonestly don't
knowhowthishappened. But1amthe
author,andthebuckstopshere.
TheTownsend LettuforDoctorsis
avital,essential avenue for
presentation ofinformation on
alternative therapies. Therefore, when
amnceptispresented, thereadershave
therighttoknowtheSOUralofthis
information andtobepresented with
substantiating references. ThisiBan
extremely valuable periodical, one
whichhasthestrength topresentnew
information andcontroversial topia.
Therefore, eachauthorhasanerln!me
responsibility - atrusttodocument all
statements heorshemakesandtobe
abletodefendhiaorherposition,baaed
onthearticles referenced inthe
manuscript.
Although subsequent enzyme
articleshavesubstantiated manyofthe
pointsmadeintheNovember, 1994
article,eacharticlemuststandonits
own.
Therefore, Iapologize tothe
Townsend lAturforDoctora;toitsfine
readers;tomyresearch mentorsatthe
University ofMinnesota, University of
Rochester, Eastman DentalCenter,and
CaseWestern ReserveUniversity; the
Ph.D.sandM.D.s(inuniversities and
research institutional throughout the
worldwhodidnothavetheopportunity
tosubstantiate theirconcepts on
systemic enzymetherapythrough the
referenced bihliography, andfinallyto
Dr.Davis.
Thehundreds ofresearch articles
onsystemic eIl%yIDetherapyverifyits
effectiveness foramultitude of
conditions. Eachreaderhastherighthadcomplained, forexample, thatan
articleintheJuly/August Savatific
American Scienct:andM~ byD.V.
SpicerandM.C.Pikewasdoctrinaire,
ideological, andpromotional, andfailed
tosupport mostofitaimportant
assertions, Iwouldt.hi.nkhisletterwas
constructive. ButIthinkhe
misunderstands theTOIClulllmd Letter'.
reasonforemtence. Although itisn't
atallthesortof"alternative health­
journalIhaveiJna&ined publishing, its
openness i8important inthis
increasingly repressive medical­
bureaucratic envirnnmenL
Therefereedjournals arenotgreat
criticsofthemselves. Someappalling
thingshappenatthe-greatjournals,"
butthescientific-medical reader
generally assumesthattheeditorsfairly
selectrepresentative expertstoreview
thesubmitted work.Venality, bigotry
andplagiarism areprobablyjustaswen
represented inthemain-line
profeasional journals 88inotherparts
ofoursociety.Thegreatest abusesare
possible whenthereferees are
anonymoWi Aseriesofshocking
experiences withjournalreferees over
aperiodof15yearsledmetostop
submitting myworktoprofessional
journalsintheU.s.Thereareonlya
fewsmalljournals thatIthinkare
respectably freefromthecorrupting
influence ofmrporate power.
In1981.1begananewsletter tokeep
myfriendsinformed ofmyprogresa.
Occasionally, thesealmostprivate
communicationa getwiderdistribution,
aswhentheTownsend Letterpicksthem
up.1amgladtoofferafewreaders
somebackground sources and
occasionally someadditional material 1
didn'tciteinthenewsletter, butwhen
someone ismakingtheirfinltapproach
toanareaofresearch, 1thinkthebest
methodistoaskasciencelibrarian to
helpthem.
RayPeat,PhD
P.O.&x5764
Eugene, Oregon97405USA
Fax503-683-4279
TOWNSENn LETTER torOOCTORS IIPATIENTS -NOVEMBER '"5"
