byRayPeat,Ph.D.Resistance oftheHeart
Theheartgivesussomecluestoour
genemlresistance tostress,aging,disease,
anddeath.Theheartandthebrainare
themoststress-resistant organs,and
whilemoderate stressandmalnutrition
cancausetheskinandthymusglandto
losemorethan90%oftheirsubstance,
onlythemostprolonged andintensestress
cancausetheheartandbraintolosemore
than11fourthoftheirsubstance. Infact,a
moderate stressthatcausesthethymus
toshrinkbymorethan90%cancausethe
hearttoincrease itsmassby80%.When
weareabletorespond adequately and
adaptively tostress,thereisatransfer'of
substance fromthelower-functioning
organs<usually theskinandthymus) to
theorgansthatarebearingthegreatest
burden,usuallytheheartandthebrain.
Theglucocorticoid hormones ofstress
playtheimportant catabolic roleof
mobilizing substances fromthe"idle­
organstosupportthewockingorgans.The
manywaysinwhichtheheartisableto
resiststress,andeventothriveonitcan
begeneralized todevelopwaystoprotect
otherorgans,andthewholebody,from
thechronicandcumulative stressesthat
leadtogeneralized atrophy, declining
function, andaging.
Duringstress,theheartandother
working organsbecomeresistant tothe
glucocorticoid hormones. Whenaperson
isgivenradioactive testosterone, itcanbe
seentoreachthehighestconcentration in
theheart.Itistestosterone's anti·
glucocorticoid effectwhichcausesitto
enlargeskeletal muscles, whenexercise
ismoderate. Itsparalleleffeetsonskeletal
muscleandheartmusclecanbeseenin
highlyadapted (stressed) long.distance
runners, sincethewallsoftheirhearts
becomethinnerastheirskeletalmuscles
becomeslimmer. Theotheranti-catabolic
steroids, pregnenolone, progesterone, and
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), are
presentinlargeramounts, andareofmore
general importance, thantestosterone,
especially inthebrain,wheretheir
concentration isveryhigh.AlbertSzent­
GyOrgyi showedthattheheartresponds
toprogesterone, andmore~ently other
researchers havepresented evidence that
DHEAisour"endogenous digitalis."
Duringmoderate exercise, adrenalin
ca\lsesincreased bloodnowtoboththe
heartandtheskeletal muscles, while
decreasing theflowofbloodtoother
536organs.Theincreased circulation carries
extraoxygenandnutrients totheworking
organs,whilethedeprivation ofoxygen
andglucose pushestheotherorgans
towardacatabolic balance. Thissimple
circulatory patternachieves to&omeextent
thesamekindofredistribution of
resources, acutely,thatisachievedin more
prolonged stressbytheactionsofthe
glucocortic:oids andtheirantagonists.
Stress-aneedforadaptation. canbe
seenasan"informtttion gap"between the
n~andthepossibility ofmeeting the
need.Appropriate modification ofthe
organism's structure closesthat
infonnation gap.Thenew·structural
trace;ormemory, candevelopaseithera
phenotypic orgenotypic change.
"Mutations" areimportant forbacterial
adaptation, andleamingis important for
mammalian adaptation.
Stressphysiology isnowrecognized as
auniversal andbo.sicparloflife, for-plants
andmicro-organisms, aswellasfor
vertebrntes. Ourbrainsarethenewest
andmostpowerful organsofadaptation
andresistance tostress,allowing the
simpler systems ofcirculation and
metabolism toorient themselves
appropriately toachievethemostbenefit
withtheleastdamage.Justasthereare
pro-andanti-catabolic honnones and
circulatory patterns, thebrainhasstress.
promoting andstress·limiting systems.
Whenperception andorientation govern
thestressreaction, theabilitytosuppress
certainpartsofthereaction pennitsfine
coordination andhighefficiency. Sleepis
ageneralized stress.limiting function of
thebrain.Another example ofhowthe
braingoverns theenergy mobilizing
systeminstresswasdemonstrated by
Seligman: Ratsthatexperienced
"capitulation stress,-beingheldstilluntil
theyquitstruggling, drowned inafew
minutes whentheywereputintoatank
ofwater.Butasingleexperience of
successfully struggling tofreedomcaused
ratstoswimformanyhouTsbefore
becoming exhausted.
Asingleexperience, aninsight,has
tremendous powertoshapethewayin
whicharatdealswithstress.Insights
andideascanbegainedthroughpractice,
buttheycanalsobepassedonculturally.
Wecanlearnhowtoprepareourselves to
respond optimally tostress,whilealso
tryingtokeeptheenvironment from
becoming toostressful.Blue-collar workers havemoreheart
attacksthandosedentary workers, and
the"bi06Ocial· stressoflowstatuscanbe
seenasapowerful factorinmortality from
heartattacks.Thehelplessfeelingoflow
statusisanalogous tocapitulation stress.
Whenstressisstrongenoughandlong
enough toovercome themultiple
protective systemsoftheheart,theheart
fnilsincertainwell-defined ways,both
functionally andstructurally. Butbefore
injuryoccurs,thestress-limiting ·self­
restrain~ systems oftheheart,ofthe
endocrine system,andofthebrain,....'111
havetofail.Considering someproblems
ofbloodcirculation willhelptoseethe
integral natureofadaptation, whenit
succeeds andwhenitfails.
Pregnant womensometimes develop
veryhighbloodpressure. Inthe1950s,
whennewdiuretics werebeingpromoted
bythedrugcompanies, itbecamestandard
practice togivepregnant womendiuretics
andalow-saltdiettocontroltheirblood
pressure. Itshouldhavebeenobvious(and
itwasobvioustopeoplelikeTomBrewer
whothoughtphysiologically, ratherthan
mechanically) thattheincrease in
pressure wasthebody'sresponse toan
increased needforcirculation. Asthefetus
grows,thebloodvolumemustexpand, to
meettheincreased circulatory needsof
theuterus, placenta, andfetus.Two
research projectsshowedthatverylarge
supplements ofsaltreliably normalized
thehighbloodpressure inwomenwith
·toxemia- ofpregnancy. Otherstudies
showedsimilarresultswithasupplement
ofprogesterone. Whenthebloodvolume
isabletoexpandasneeded,circulation is
adequate atnormalpressure. Whenblood
pressure isforceddownbyadministering
adiuretictofurtherdiminish analready
inadequate bloodvolume,thecirculation
ofoxygenandnutrients tothefetusis
seriously impaired, andahugeepidemic'
ofmentalretardation andhyperactivity,
associated withlowbirthweight, beganin
the1950s,andcontinued untileventually
thefearofmalpractice suitsstoppedthe
absurdpractice.
AfewyearsagoIaskedarecently
graduated physician whatthingshewould
wanttoconsider inapatientwithhigh
bloodpressure. Someofhissuggestions
fortherapywereveryreasonable, buthis
approach madeitclearthathewas
•538
Townsend LeuerrorD....,toNJllrK"; 99~
IResistance oftheHeart
~536
thinking ofcirculation inamechanical
way.exactlyasaskilledplumber would
goaboutnormalizing thecirculation of
water,without caringverymuchabout
whatthewaterwasbeingusedfor.The
circulation ofbloodisnicelyadjusted to
meetthedemands ofthetissues.Blood
pressure increases gradually withage,and
individuals whosebloodpressure stops
increasing withagehavebeenfoundto
haveashorter life-expectancy than
nannal. Apparently, agedtissueisless
efficient, andneedsamorestrongly
pumpedstreamofblood.
WhenIfound,around1970,thatthe
pressure ofoxygenwllslowinoldanimals
andinanimalsthathadbeentreatedwith
estrogen, Itriedtodetennine thereason
fortheoxygendeficiency ineachcase.I
foundthatinoldindividuals (hamsters or
humans) thebloodwasonlyabout50%
oxygenated asitpassedthroughthelungs,
asifdiffusion intothecapillaries was
impaired. Estrogen treatment (ratsand
humans) doesthesame,apparently by
causingasortofedemathatthickens the
lungtissuethrough whichtheoxygenhas
todiffuse.Bothestrogen treatment and
agecauseotherinefficiencies inoxygen
trnnsport andinefficient useinthetissues.
further exacerbating theshortage of
oxygen.Interestingly, recentstudiesshow
that"capitulation stress"causesthesame
varietyofproblems inoxygenation,
transport, anduse.Instress,eventhe
respiratory centerofthebrainbecomes
under-active, tolerating theslateof
hypoxia. Sinceprogesterone activates the
respiratory center, thedepressed
respiration ofstressisconsistent witha
deficiency ofprogesterone. (Seenoteat
end.)
Whentissueoxygenation isinadequate,
glucoseisdepleted quickly. Inprolonged
stress,theliver'sgluconeogenic response
totheglucororticoids isdepressed, asis
itsabilitytofonnandstoreglycogen. As
glucoseislessavailable, theamountof
adrenalin inthebloodrises,andfatis
mobilized fromstorageasasubstitute
sourceofenergy. Freefattyacids,
especially unsaturated fats,aretoxicto
themitochondrial respiratory system,
blocking boththeabilitytouseoxygen
andtheabilitytoproduce energy.The
increased useoffats,insteadofglucose,
causeslipidperoxidation toincrease, and
promotes therelease oflysosomal
538enzymes, theaccumulation ofcalciumin
mitochondria, thedepletion ofATPand
creatine phosphate, andafailureto
"pump"calciumoutofthecells,causing
incomplete relaxation andrigidityofthe
heartmusclecells.
Thiscomplex ofeffectscanbecalled
"catecholamine toxicity.· Rona,etaL, using
isoproteronol in1959,clearlyestablished
theexistence ofthist.oxicity. Severalyears
ago,itwasnoticedthatmortality inthe
U.S.fromasthmaincreased greatlyinthe
yearssincecatecholamine therapybecame
common, withoutacorrespondinginc::rease
intheincidence ofasthma.Itisnowwidely
accepted thatthethere.py causedthe
increased mortality. Following Rona's
.workasitdid,thislargemedical
experiment canbetakenasstrong
confinnation oftheideaofcatecholamine
toxicity, andasastepinunderstanding
stresssickness. Glucose depletion leads
toadrenalin secretion, whichcausesfat
mobili.tation, calcium-activated over­
stimulation ofcells,withimpainnent of
theenergyproduction whichisnecessary
forrecovery (bywayofmusclerelaxation
andcalciumexcretion, etc.).
Broda Barnes showed that
hypothyroidism causesheartdisease,and
alsocauses atendency toward
hypoglycemia. Lowthyroid people
compensate forthedeficiency ofenergy
andglucose(andofoxygen, forreasons
similar Lathosementioned above)by
secreting anexcessofadrenalin. 'nteir
24-hour urinemetabolites ofadrenalin
sometimes aTe30or40timesnonnal.
Recentstudiesthatshowthatamoderate
doseofthyroxin lowenlipidperoxidation
confinnthatthyroidhasananti·stress
effect.The"conduction block"whichoccurs
inhypothyroidism seemstobethesame
astheconduction blockwhichdevelops in
stressandpredisposes tofibrillation. The
electrical instability oftheheartproduced
byexcessive adrenergic stimulation can
alsomakethesinuspacemaker more
susceptible tovagalinhibition. (Ithink
thiseffectcanbeobserved intheskipped
beatsoftenexperienced byhypothyroid
peopleduringstressorfatigue. Inother
situations, oflongandintensestress,vagal
stimulation protectsagainstfibrillation.)
Inhypothyroidism, thereisimpaired
relaxation ofmuscles, asseeninthe
Achilles reflex, Ol"intheTwaveofthe
electrocardiogram. Thisissimilar Lathec:ontractural rigiditywhichde"'elops inthe
stressed heart.
Whenstressissevereandprolonged,
theliverlosesenzymes ofthedetoxifying
system,andalsoofthesystemthatforms
bileacids,causing atendency toward
abnormal lipidmetabolism, including
hypercholesterolemia. Thyroid deficiency
limitstheconsumption ofcirculating
cholesterol forsteroidhonnone synthesis,
andbothstressandhypothyroidism are
assoc:iated withelevated bloodcholesterol.
Considering theclearandwelldefined
toxicityofadrenalin andfreefattyacids,
theroleofcholesterol inheartdisease
beginstolooksortofepiphenomenal.
Fatsenteranddamage cellsthatare
over-stimulated andde-energized.
Calcium isauniversal activator, but
excesscalciumisthecentrallinkinmost
typesofeelldamage. Calcium uptakeand
retention arepromoted byadrenalin,
histamine, vasopressin, energydepletion,
andlipidperoxidation andbytheactivity
ofphospholipases; sincecalcium can
activate phospholipases andlipid
peroxidation, andinterferes withenergy
production, viciouscirclescandevelop.
Excessive adrenalin andcalcium also
promote clotting, and-asthebeta­
adrenergic receptors becomedesensitiU!d
-spasmsinthecoronary arteries. Altered
bloodvesseltone,whichcanbeproduced
byseriousstress,cancausevenouspooling
ofblood,whichsynergizes withthe
impaired relaxation oftheheartLacause
cardiogenic shock.
Thereareseveralsystemsthatoppose
thetoxiceffectsofadrenalin. GABA,
dopamine, andadenosine havemultiple
anti-adrenergic effects. Inmany
situations, theparasympathetic system
isprotective against adrenalin. The
protective steroidsalsoactatmanylevels.
Magnesium, retained inthecelllargely
undertheinfluence ofATPandthyroid,is
ourbasic"calcium blocker: orcalcium
antagonist. GABAanddopamine inhibit
theACTH.glucocorticoid system,andshin.
thesteroidbalancetowardtheprotective
anti-glucocorticoids. progesterone,
testosterone, pregnenolone, andDHEA.
Adequate glucoseandoxygenarethe
mostimportant anti·stress substances.
"Overload" ofanorganmennsthatthe
bloodisn'tdelivering enoughoxygenand
glucose tosustain theneededlevelof
functioning. Thyroid andprogesterone
Towll~elld LetterforDoctorsJUIl('1992
tendtoprevent overload byincreasing
respiratory efficiency, andbyincreasing
thellver'sglycogen storage.
Uridine, aco-factor inglycogen
synthesis, canalsoprevent stressby
improving glycogen storage.
Anti<lxidants. especially vitamin E,
prevent tissuedamage bypromoting
normaloxidation.
Selye'sdemonstration ofcornoil's
toxicitytotheheartisanimportanllink
inthegeneralpictureofstressinjuryand
adrenalin toxicity. Theprotective effects
ofsaturated fatsarenotsurprising when
seenagainstthebackground ofthetoxic
effects ofadrenalin, causing the
mobilization offattyacidsandthe
resulting lipidpcroxidation.
Meerson's demonstration thatgentle
adaptation tohypoxia (similar to
treatment withthyroid hormone) can
preventheartdamage fromsubsequent
intenseandprolonged stress,issimilarto
Seligman's discovery thatratscanbe
protected againststressbyanexperience
ofescape,butMeerson hassurveyed agreatrangeofprotective processes,
ranging fromthesubcellular leveltothe
mosthighlyevolved brainsystems. In
thinking aboutMeerson's achievements
inprotecting theheartagainststress,itis
important toremember thattheheartis
ourmoststress-resistant organ,andthat
thethingsthatprotect.theheartfrom
deadlystresswillalsoprotecttheother
organsfromtheeveryday stresses, which
accumulate tocausetheproblems of
generalaging.Liver,lungs,pancreas and
otheressential organsaresusceptible to
thesamekindsofdamageastheheart,
butunderconditions thatarerelatively
mildandordinary.
Theresistance oftheheartandliver
canbecompared inseveral ways.ror
example, DNAreplication ismoreeasily
suppressed bystressintheliver,thanin
theheart,butDNArepairisnotaffected
inthesamewaybystress.Hyperfunction
oftheheartstabilizes DNAagainstiI\iury,
soDNArepairisgreaterintheliverthan
intheheart,andisleastinthebrain.Resistance oftheHeartI
Meenon's laboratory hasstudied the
anti-stress andanti-ndrenaJin effectsof
GADAanditsmetabolite, gamma.hydroxy
butyrate, especially inthefonnofthe
lithiumsalt.(Lithium seemstohaveits
ownanti-stress effect.probably partlyas
asodiumagonist,andpartlythrough its
abilitytocomplex withtheammonium
whichisproduced inthebraininfatigue,
whichisexactlywhentheGABAsystem
becomes active.)GHBisprotective against
stressdamagetomanytissues.Itprevents
stress-induced enzyme leakage from
tissues,ulceration ofthegastricmucosa,
lipidperoxidation, epileptic seizure,
damaged contractile function oftheheart,
andcardiacarrhythmias produced by
stressorischemia.
Meerson's grouphasalsostudiedthe
protective effects ofthegamma­
butyrobetaine derivatives ofthesortthat
arenormally produced inthebrainand
heart,orthathavebeensynthesized or
extracted fromplants.Thesesubstances
stabilize theheartrhythm inacute
•
Itsforwomenonly.
AllergyResearchGroupintroduces anexclusivenutritional
formulation basedonthelatestclinicalresearchand
scientifically designed tohelpmaintainhealthybonetissue.
Selectedingredients include:
•Hydroxyapatite, anaturalconsrirucm of
boneandthemostbioavailable formofcalcium
•GAG(chondroitin sulfntes), rawmaterial
forboneconnective tissue
•Phytocstrogens, plantextracts(hatsuppon
esrrogcnbalance
•Keyvitaminsandminerals. including
traceandultrarraceminerals,
essentialforbonetissuerenewalForWomenOnly­
CALCIUM HERBAL
180capsules
(20daysupply)
Orderno.945
Soldasndietary
suppltmtlJl OIl~I:
1-800-545-9960
AllergyResearchGroup~
400PredaStTt:el.SJnLrJndro.CAW,i"/
.,\,M.
Townsend LetterforDoctorsJune1992 539
IResistance oftheHeart
>
myocardial infarction, andalsoin
pootinfarction c8rdiosderosis (page173,
Adaptive Protection oftheHeart,F.Z.
Meerson, eRGPress,BocaRaton,1991).
Theyhaveaprotective actionagainstboth
adrenalin andcalcium. Interestingly,
atropine potentiates theprotective elTect
ofthebutyrobetaine against calcium
toxlcity.
Acomplete listofprotective nutritional
chemicals andnaturaldrugsoranalogsto
ourendogenous protective factorswould
beverylong,butweshouldgivespecial
thoughttocertainones,including succinic
acid,whichstimulates respiration and
prot~tive steroidsynthesis; thyroidand
vitamin E,whichpromote normal
oxidation whilepreventing abnormal·
oxidation; magnesium; sodium and
lithium, whichhelpustoretain
magnesium; tropicalfruits,whichcontain
GHB;coconutoil,whichprotectsagainst
cardiac necrosis, lipidperoxidation,
hypothyroidism, hypoglycemia, and
histamine damage; valium agonists,
naturalanti-histamines; adenosine and
undine. Visitstohigherelevations, and
exposure tobright,long-wave light,can
causethebodytooptimize itsownanti-stresschemistry. Avoiding thesenseof
beingtrapped isnhigh-level adaptive
factor.
Note:Theconsistency withwhichoxygen
becomes deficient inaging,stress,and
estrogen excesssuggests thatabasic
coordination mechanism maybeinvolved,
inwhichthereisashifttowardthe
conditions whchwillactivate the
expression ofcertaingenes-possiblythe
hypoglycemia-stress-heat-shock proteins,
orpossibly simplytheproteins ofcell
divisionandgrowth.
Thelife-span ofcellorganelles, DNA,
andessential enzymes, isextended by
adaptation. Thecellular (membrane
phospholipid) composition adjuststoward
alowercontentofunsaturated fattyacids.
(S.Gudbjarnasson, eta1.,"Modification of
cardiacphospholipids andcatecholamines
instresstolerance," inAlphu-tocopherol,
Oxygen,ondBiom.embrones, C.DeDuve
andO.Hayashi, Eds.,ElsevierlNorth
Holland Biomed.Pr.,Amsterdam, 1978,
p.297.)Diacylglycerol causesactivation
oftranscription, cellgrowth, and
proliferation. (C.L.Hammond, eta1.,
"'Diverse formsofstressleadtoanewpattern ofgeneexpression through a
common andessential metabolic
pathway," P.N.A.S. 79,3485,1982.)
Stabilization ofmRNAsplicing and
protein synthesis (H.G.Yostands.
Lindquist., "'RNAsplicing isinterrupted
byheatshockandisprotected byheat
shockproteinsynthesis," Cell45,185,
1986)suggests thepossibility thatthis
systemmightalsobeimportant inviral
immunity.
Reference
C.Rona,eta1."Aninfarct-like myocardial
lesionandothertoxicmanifestations
produced byisoproterenal intherat.,~
Arch.PothoL67,443,1959.
P.S.:Pavlov'sturn-of-the-century workon
theheart's"trophic nerves"shouldbe
re·examined inthelightofthisnew
information onthetrophiceffectsof
adaptation.
Correspondence andSubscriptions:
RayPeat.,Ph.D.
RayPeat'sNewsletter
P.O.Box3427
Eugene, OR97403•
5<0!MIXED DOUBLESI
Townsend LetterforDoclorsJune1992
