Othertestsma)'~&uggested depending
ontheparticular circumstances ofeac;h
casesuchasallergytesting(vitamins,
foods,environmentals, etc_),pHtitration
(todetermine levelofstomach acidity
function), oranything elsethatis
appropriate.
rD.DietandSupplementation:
Supervised dietarysupplementation is
basedontestresultsandsupervised dietary
counseling.Thepatientisaskedtoschedule
anhourvisitwithaviewtoadvise
supplementation aminimum of72hours
(optimal 1-2weeks)priortothedental
appointment whichinvolves actual
removalofamalgam materials.
IV.TheDentalReferral: Ifthepatient
hasnotalready contacted adentist, we
shallprovideasourcelistofareadentists
whoprovide sequential removal of
amalgams, safetyprocedures withrespect
tomercuryin thedentaloffice(airfiltering
system,rubberdam,etc.),andreplacement
withbiocompatible materials, etc.All
effortsaremadetothencoordinate the
medicalcarewiththedentalworkthatis
tobeundertaken suchastheDental
Amalgam LV.withEDTAandvitaminC
within twohoursofeachdental
appointmentforprotection &gainstrelease
ofmen:ury vaporduringprocedures. The
LV.maybeadministered priortothe
amalgam removal withdeletion ofall
vitaminCtoavoidtheinterference known
tooccurwiththeanesthetic. Anerdental
amalgam removalprocedures, thevitamin
C -LV.ororalvitamin Csupplements ­
maybetakenimmediately.
V.Officevisitfollow-uponeweekafter
amalgam removal. Thismaybeaphone
consultation.
VI.Officevisitorphoneconsultation
follow-up twoweeksafteramalgam
removaL
VII.Follow.up bloodtestsatthree
weeksinrludeCSCwithdifferential and
chemistry profile, alongwithurine
mercury.
VlIl.Follow-up bloodtestsatthree
months, post.amalgam removal, include
CSCwithdifferential, chemistry profile
andurinemercury, alongwithahairtrace
mineralanalysis.
IX.Follow-up atsixmonths will
include aCSCwithdifferential and
chemistry profile,aswellasurinemercury
andhairtracemineralanalysis.
Alloftheaforementioned procedures
shouldbefollowed totheletterinorderto
obtainthebestresultsfromamalgam
removaL Patients havebeenharmed by
neglectofanyone oftheseimportant
phases.Donottakeshortcuts.
Townsend LettcrforDoc~orsJuly19!HDavidJ.Ogle,M.D.
Jonathan V.Wright,M.D.
Tahoma Clinic
24030-132ndAve.S.E.
Kent,Washington 98042
206·631-8920
Sharks,Salmon&Osmotic
Therapies
Editor:
Inthe19605,ImetLeonellStrong,the
geneticist whodeveloped afamousstrain
ofmicethatareextremely susceptible to
breastcancer. Myfirstresearch in
endocrinology hadtodowiththeirestrogen
metabolism, andwaystononnalize it.
Strong(whostudiedgenetics withT.H.
Morgan) wasinterested inthefactthat
sharksarenotsusceptible tocancer.Asa
geneticist, hesawthisinrelationtotheir
-genetic stability" thatis,thefactthat
theyhaven'tdeveloped beyondanearly
stageofevolution, andhebelieved that
cancerisaresultofgeneticinstability. He
foundthatinjections ofanextractof shark's
liverprevented micefromdeveloping
breastconcer;however, similarextracts
fromotherkindsoniverhadsimilareffects
onthemice.Sincehismicehadtoomuch
estrogen, Isupposed thattheirliverswere
deficient insomething neededtoeliminate
estrogen, sincethelivernormally isa
powerful regulator ofestrogen, usinga
certainsystemof-detoxifying- enzymes.
(Asitturnsout,thethyroidhonnone isthe
basicregulator ofthisdetoxifyingfunction.)
AsIstudiedestrogen inothersituations,
twofeatures ofitsactionstoodout-it
interferes withrespiration, anditcauses
cellstotakeupwater.Itsothereffects
seemtofollowfromthese.Inthe1920s,it
wasfoundthathypotonicity, anexcessof
water,stimulates celldivision (while
hypertonicity inhibits it).Around 1940,
HansSelyefoundthatestrogen's systemic
effectmimicstheshockphaseofthestress
reaction. Inshock,deficient circulation of
bloodandthusdeficitnt oxygenation of
tissuearethemainproblem, andSelye
considered theadrenalsteroidstobecrucial
inresolving theproblem, andcreating
adaptation tothestress.Buttheadrenalsteroids canhavetheirownundesirable
consequences.
Sharks, besidesbeingprimitive and
notsuffering fromcancer, are
physiologically uniqueinanother way:
theirbodyfluidsareosmotically inbalance
withseawater,makingthemhypenonit' to
otheranimals' bodyfluids.Themineral
contentofsharks'blood isnotverydif'ferent
fromthatofotheranimals. Theosmotic
difference ismadeupbyaveryhigh
concentration ofurea(andoftrimethyl
ammonium). Ingeneral, animalsthatlive
inwaterareabletogetridofammonia
easily,becauseitisverysolubleinwater,
andtheexcretion ofnitrogen asureaand
uricacidisconsidered tohaveevolved to
avoidthetoxicityofthelargeamountof
ammoniathatwouldotherwise accumulate
inlandanimals. Therefore, itseemsthat
sharks'ureaevolvedasakindofosmotic
buffer(rather thanasanexcretory
product), keepingtheminosmoticbalance
withoceanwater,withouthavingtodeal
withintemalitation oftheextremely high
(3.3%)sodiumcontentofoceanwater.
Another kindoffish,thesalmon,which
returntofreshwnterforreproducing, show
theotherextreme ofadaptation toan
osmoticproblem. AfterIi\ling-isotonically"
inthehypertonic oceanenvironment,
keeping theirmineral content and
osmolarity lowerthansea·waters, they
suddenly havetoreadapttotheextremely
hypotonic freshwater.Thesecretion of
prolactinandglucocorticoid steroidsseems
tofacilitate thissuddenadaptntion, but
thosehormones alsoseemtoproducean
explosively rapidkindofaging.Ithink
theircondition issimilar tothe
-Cushingoid- symptoms thatfrequently
appearinmiddle-aged people.
.Highlyenergized cellscanresistthe
osmoticstressoftoomuchwaterintheir
environment, andtiredcellscan't.
Removing thestress,bymaking the
surrounding fluidisotonic orslighlJy
hypertonic, canprotectthecells'energy
level,andgivethemarest.Untilabout
1940,theuseofhypertonic solutions in
therapy wasfairlycommon. Booksstill
mentiontheuseofurea,USP,asadiuretic
totreatbrainswelling, butIhaven'theard
thatitisliitillusedthiswe.yintheUnited
States. Veterinarians sometimes use
hypertonic ureatotreatuterine
inflammation andinfectedwounds. Early
inthiscenturyitwasoftenmentioned asa
mfedisinfectant andpromoter ofhealing
~
,.,
~
forwounds. Itwassometimes usedasa
powder,andwassprinkled pureontoskin
gransorbetween bonefragments in
repairing fractures. Although itcaused
somepain,peoplegenerally thoughtit
accelerated healing whilepreventing
infection. (Typically, 5&Tamsofpowder
wouldbedosedintothewound;milder
treatments wouldprobably havebeen
possible, butwartime conditions didn't
fostersubtlety inmedical research.)
(Symmers, Lancet,December 4,1915.)
Hypertonic sodiumchloride (Clifford
White,£oracet.October30,1915)wasalso
usedtotreatinfected wounds, andits
successintreating warwoundsledtoits
useasavaginaldoucheintreatingvariolls
inflammations andinfections, including
infections BS50Ciated withchild.birth,
salpingitis, cellulitis, gonorrhea, vaginitis,
anrlerosions ofthecervix,andinpreparing
acancerous cervixforsurgery. Irrigation
oftheabdomen withthesalinesolution
gavegoodresultsinacuteinfections that
required abdominal drainage. Whiteused
asolution c:ontaining 1/2ounceofsodium
chlorideand1116ounceofsodiumcitrate
inapintofwater.M.Englaender (}.ftd.
Klin..January 2,1916)usedintravenous
il\ie<:tions of100mtof2.,NaCltotreata
varietyofinfections andinflammations.
InRussia,Gubin(RuuhyVroch14(38»
treatedsciaticawithtwoglassesofwarm
watercontaining 1.4teaspoonfulsofNaCl,
placedintherectum;itcausedprofuse
sweating anddiuresis.
Ihaveknownmanypeoplewithfood
allergies (orwithlingering coldorflu
symptoms) whosaidthatalthough their
abdomens weredilitended and
uncomfortable, theyweresothoroughly
constipated thatnohuatives worked.
Whentheirbowels didmove,they
sometimes described ribbon-shaped feces.
Occasionally IsawtheirX-rays,inwhich
anopaque~meal· showedupasaverythin
andintermittent filament.ltappeared that
thewallofthebowelwasenonnously
swollen. Onewoman complained that
enemaswereuseless,becausewhenaquart
ofwaterwasinjected, nothingreturned
fromthebowel,thoughshewouldhaveto
urinatemorethanusual.Thecolonwas
obviously drinking thewater.Isuggested
thatshetryahypertonic glucoseandsalt
enema,withanaspirinadded,neutralized
byalittlesoda,andsheimmediately had
goodresults.
,4<Peoplewithlesscomplete obstruction
cangetthesameeffectbydrinking a
hypertonic solution ofepsomsaltsand
sodiumchloride, withanaspirin.Although
thisosmoticdeflation ofinflamed tissueis
crude,Ithinkithelpstopromote real
recovery, byreducing thereactivity ofthe
tissue,andallowingittorecoveritsnormal
energypatterns..
InPMS,edemaisacommon problem,
anditusedtobethoughtthatedemaofthe
brainwasresponsible fortheirritability or
depression orothernervous symptoms,
anddiuretics suchasammonium
compounds andureawerecommonly used.
(Premenstrual saltcravings aretheresult
oftheestrogen-disturbed waterbalanc:e,
andsalt·restriction forPMSisas
inappropriate asitisforpre-eclampsia or
toxemiaofpregnanc:y.) Alkaloids areonen
activeinmodifying thewateroontentof
physical systems, aswellasofcells.The
alkaloids thatareoftenusedintreating
PMSseemtofavorimproved oxygenation
andelimination ofedema.Isuspectthat
thesedrugs,andthenatural hormones
progesterone andpregnenolone, actinthe
samedirection ashyperosmolarity.
Forseveralyears, Ihavebeeninterested
inthebiological effectsofammonia, and
compounds thataremetabolically closeto
it.Thereisclearevidenc:e ofammonia'.
antiviral effect,whic:hstimulated extensive
research bydrugcompanies seeking
patentable antiviral amines.Mostsimple
substances haveregulatory func:tions in
themselves, besidesparticipating inother
systems. Besidesviralimmunity, Ithink
ammonia isinvolved inregeneration and
nervemodulation. Urea,inosine,GABA,
thepolyamines, andbetainederivativn
(e.g.,gamma-butyrobetaine) areclosely
related toammonia metabolism, and
combinations ofthemwillprobably have
manyusefulbiological effects.
Sodium chloride, glucose, andother
substances canbeusedathigh
concentrations fortheirosmotic effects,
buttheyalsohavec:hemic:a1 andmetabolic:
effectsthntaren'tnec:essarily desirable.
Bothosmotic andbioc:hemical effec:ts
shouldbetakenintoa«ountinagiven
therapy.
RayPeat,Ph.D.
RayPeat',Newskttu
P.O.Box3427
Eugene, Oregon91403•Homeopathy vsAllopathy
Editor.
WewouldliketothankDr.SaulPilaro[
Vanoouver, B.C.forhisthoughtful and
informative discussion, "WhatHealed
Sarah?- Weappreciate andwelcome
feedback anddiscussion stimulated byour
artides. Therewasagreatdealof
improvement whenSarahwasgiventhe
remedy, Calcarea carbonica, aswellas
improvement inlaboratory values.Indeed,
whenever Sarahhasrelapsed, theremedy
onteagainallowsherenoughenergyto
function, enableshertoloseweight,stops
hairlossandhelpsherthinkdearlyagain.
Thisdoesnotoccuruntilshegetsthe
remedy, whic:h.timulates rapid
improvement inhersymptoms. Her
hypothyroidism hasnotresolved onits
own,butcontinues tobeimproved under
mntinuedhomeopathic treatment, without
theneedforSynthroid.
Weagreethatitisimportant notto
attribute success to8treatment,
homeopathic orallopathic:, whenthebody
wouldhavedonethe5Bme healingwithout
it.Butlet'snotignoretheeffectsofa
treatment whichhasproduced obvious
improvement, subjective andobjective,just
because somepatients haveimproved
withoutitinthenaturalc:ourseoftheir
healingproress.
RobertUllman, N.D.and
JudythReichenberg.Ullman, N.D.
TheNorthwest Centerfor Holistic:Medicine
4072-9thAve.,N.E.
Seattle,Washington 98105
206-547-9665
Townsend Lctler(orDoctor.!July1991
