Responseto
"SalesPitchlorLinseedOil"
Editor:
Itisunfortunate thataNewsletter sua.
asyoun,withaneditorial policyof
openness tonutritional ideasandmetabolic:
therapies, occasionally publishes material
whichistheresultofincomplete
information. ItisstillmOTeregrettable,
however, thattheauthorofsuchanarticle
thenusesthis'information' tolevelugly
attacksonothers.
Dr.Raymond Peat,inhisarticleon
"SalesPitchforLinseed Oil-makesa
number ofstatements whicharenot
defensible. Forinstanc:e, Johanna Budwig
isalicensed andaccredited M.D.,which
Peatdoesnotmention.Onthecontrary. he
putsher·8cientific wor~inquotes,
implying thatitmaybepRudo-lJcientific.
Dr.Budwighasdocumented resultsin
reversing metastasized cancerwithher
useofflaxseed oilincombination with
milkproteins(Quarlc cottagecheese).Peat
attacksherworkwithstatements about
linseedoil,quoting'"Itisknownthat...•
Whoknows? Anddotheseunnamed
perlJOnshealcancer?
UdoErasmus isthoroughly familiar
withthechemistry offatsandoilsandhas
workedforsometimeasanobserver ofDr.
Johanna Budwig's work.TheexpreBSed
-suspicion- bytheauthorthatneither
Erasmus norBudwighavestudiedorganic
chemistry isanothersnideremark.
Whenauthorsmakestatements about
effectsofmaterials, itisalwaysalittle
dangerous whenthesesubstances are
·controversial.- Thesuppoeed deleterious
effectaofunsaturated oils,diacusaed by
someresearchers. canbedisproven by
others.
However, whenPeatquotesDr.
Gerson's workandreferstoGer1lOn's book,
ACon«rTMrapy, ofwhichhepurchased
thefirsteditionpublished byDr.GenIOn
whilehewasstillalive(1958),Peatcould
nothavereadAppendix Ioftheeeeond
editionwhichdil!JCusse8 variousitemsin
respecttolinseed(flaxseed) oil.Peatcould
nothaveknownthat:
1.DuringthelastyearofhilJpractice,
afterthefirsteditionofhisbookWQ8
published, Gersonaddedlinseedoiltothe
dietofhiscancerpatients withexcellent
resultlJ.(ACancerTherapy -2nded.,pp
397-398).
'442.Dr.Gersonwroteanunpublished letter
toProfessor AlbertSchweitur, in1958,
whichwelaterpublished intheGerson
Institute's Newsletter '3,Sept/Oct 1984,
asfollows:
-Vouwillbeinterested toknowthat
afteryearsofeffort,Ihavesucceeded in
stimulating thefat-metabolism without
bringing malignant cellsbacktolife.All
previous effortsfailedevenaftermany
monthsofimprovement, ascancercells
flaredupwhenoilswereaddedtothediet.
Ifoundfinallythatlinseedoil,whencold
pressedandprepared without chemical
additives, isextremely valuable.
Infaradvanced cancerpatients, we
givetwotablespoonful. oflinseedoil daily
forashortperiodoftime;thenone
tablespoon, andlaterstilllees.Linseedoil
hasthreeunsaturated fattyacids.Itis
saidtobetheonlyoilintheworldwith
thesepropertiel. According tothe
literature, especially inpapersbyJohanna
Budwig fromMunster (Westphalia,
Germany) itseem.thatthesefattyacids
stimulate thereticular tissue,the
reticuloendothelial system,andthevarious
systemsuthevieceral nervous system.
Theabovetisauescomprise thedefense
andhealingmechanisms ofanimaland
human bodies, deeply unitedand
accumulated intheliver.Theconclusion
hasbundrawnthatnoanimalorhuman
bodyisabletosynthesize linseedoil
molecules. Therefore, itmustbegivenfor
alongtimeinminimal quantities.-
Dr.Gerson,intheyearsofhispractice,
hadexperimented withvariousoilstotry
toobtainthedesiredeffectwhichBudwig
wasobtaining, buthadfoundthattheoils
hetriedonlycausedtumortissuetoregrow.
Thatexplains theurgentadmonition in
hisbook,NoFat.-NoDiu.Butwhenhe
foundthelinseedoilwithitaunusual
properties, h.obviously changedhismind.
Sincethisdiecovery, aswellasthecontact
withBudwig, postdates thepublication of
Gerson's firsteditionofACancerTheon,
clearlyPeatdidnotfindanyreference to
Budwignortolinseedoilinthateditionof
thebook.
Itisunfortunately truethatintodays
worldmany-scientista- prostitute their
worktoindustry anditlldemands -in
otherwords,money.Peatassumes that
Erasmus isguiltyofthiscommercialism;
anotherfalseAssumption.
Readers interested inimproving their
healthmaywanttoacquaint themselves
withUdoErasmus' excellent book,Fat.
andOils,andtheGerson Institute's
Newsletter *22123,-PatsthatHeal-FatsthatKill:aswellasDr.Gerson', book,A
CoMerTMrapy -Ruuh.ofFiftyCOlJu.
Allareavailablefrom theGerlM)n Institute.
Charlotte Gerson,President
GenIOnInstitute
P.O.Box"30
Bonita,California 92002
Unsaturated OilsHaveDeleterious
Ellecls
Editor:
Iagreewithyourrecentremarks about
directing criticism mainlytowardtheerrors
ofconventional medicine, because the
biggestproblems existwithintheorthodox
andgovernment.established medical
system. A1Jyousaid,peopleshouldnotbe
putdownbecauseoftheirdegrees,andfor
thatre880nIavoidputtinglettersafter
name.,eueptwhentherei.areuon forit.
However, IgotaletterfromCharlotte
Gersoncriticizingmeforfailingtomention
Budwig's degree.Sincetheotherdegrees
(including mine)wereeditorially addedto
myletter,itwasn'tmyintention toslight
Budwigforbeingdegreedeficient.
However, Charlotte Gerson allM)says
thatImade·anumberofstatementll which
arenotdefensible,- butdoesn'tseemto
understand whatIsaid.Iamawarethat
linseedoilhasbeenusedbyMexican
physicians totreatcancerat1e88tsince
1939,andthatitcan betoxictocancercells
(thoughprobably lesstoxicthantononnal
ceUs·),andthatitslaxative actionis
plausibly effective intreatingconstipated
cancerpatients. Myprimary criticism is
thatpeoplewhogetonthebigmarketing
bandwagon (whether theproductislinseed
oilorgermanium orironsupplements) 10
often-asintheUdoErasmus book­
appeartosystematically leadattention
awayfromthepossible dangers oftheir
product.
The-deleterious effectsofunsaturated
oils-havebeenclearlyestablished andare
recognized byeveryone working inthe
field.Theyarenot-supposed- andarenot
merely-discussed- subjecttodisproof"by
others.-Manypeoplearenowinvestigating
avarietyoftheories thatattempttoexplain
thellpecificnatureofthetoxicity.
Theopinions credited toBudwigby
Erasmus suggest ignorance oforganic
chemistry andbiochemistry. Ifsomeone
takesDr.Budwig's ideasseriously, TLfD
shouldinvitehertoexplainthemherself.
Without knowing more about the
publication detailsofthenewversionof
thebook,FiftyCases,andtheletterthat
Towrusend Let.terrorDoct.oraMay1988
MaxGerson supposedly wroteto
Schweitzer, Iwouldn't wanttoanalyzeall
oftheideasascribed tohim.Theoriginal
book,whichIbelievewasreprinted several
timeswithout changes, evenafterhis
death,wasacoherent scientific document.
Posthumous "neweditions" alwaysraise
questions.
Raymond Peat,Ph.D.
1585Moss
Eugene, Oregon97403
'Cancer "",lIaarerichinanti<:Jllidanta whichprotect
themagain.tfreeradicala.J.Duc:heane, Nul.BioL
XVI(5-6),1977,dillCWlllao thillandgivaorefereneee.
MoreThanOne"Besf'Testfor
Parasites
Editor:
Iwouldliketotakethisopportunity to
informyourreadersoftwoveryimportant
pointsregarding state-of-the-art parasite
testing.
Firat,theGreatSmokies Medical
Laboratory nowoffersthemost
comprehensive Ova&Parasite testing.
Wearetheonlylabthatemploys Enzyme
hnmunoassay forspecificorganisms, in
additiontoImmunfluoresence assay.EIA
testingis96%sensitive and100%specific
forsearched organisms. Ourstaining
techniques includeproprietary stainsthat
haveincreased ouryieldsdramatically.
Thesestate-of-the-art techniques are
performed aspartofour"Intensive Ova&
Parasite" test(cost$70.00). Ourresults
reportincludesdetailedcommentaries and
picturesofanyidentified organisms.
Secondly, Ihavesomecomments
concerning themethodofsamplecollection.
Wearetheonlylabthatoffersachoiceof
eitherrectalmucosalswaborfecessample
submittal. Ourpreliminary dataindicates
thatgiventheadvanced detection
techniques nowbeingused,theremaybe
littledifference between samplesources.
Therejustisn'tenoughcurrentdatato
support aclaimforeithermethodat
present. Unfortunately, theclinicaltrial
thatanotherphysician andlabreference
intheirsupportofrectalmucosal swabis
actuallyseriously flawedandincomplete.
Theclinical trialsdidnotincludeduplicate
sampletestingandthetherapeutic agents
usedfortreatment werenotspecificfor
justparasites (theywerebroadspectrum
antimicrobial). Inordertorectifythe
currentinformation "gap,"GreatSmokies
MedicalLaboratory isconducting thefirst
trueresearch project toanswer this
Townsend LetterforDoctorsMay1988question. Wearehavingparticipating
physicians submitconcurrently, botha
rectalswabandfecessample,from1,000
patients. Wewillprocessthesamplesat
thesametime,providing comparative
resultsforthesubmitting physician and
forthestudydatabase.Costtothepatient
isasifjustonesampleweresubmitted.
Anyphysicians thatwouldliketo
participate, pleasegivemeacall(800-522­
4762)sothatwecanprovideyouwiththe
specialcollection kits.
TheGreatSmokies MedicalLaboratory
hasalwaysprovided economical stool
evaluations employing methods thatare
constantly updatedandimproved_ Weare
proudtooffertheseimprovements toour
Ova&Parasite detection procedures.
Stephen Barrie,N.D.
GreatSmokies MedicalLaboratory
18ARegentParkBlvd.
Asheville, NorthCarolina 28806
GenitalMutilation
Editor:
Rituals,nomatterhowoutrageous, are
noteasilyeradicated. Thecastrations of
maleslavesintheOttoman Empireand
elsewhere, forinstance, werepracticed for
manyyears.Although thereisnohumane
justification forthebarbaric customof
female genital mutilations, the
perpetrators caneasilyrationalize.
However, beforewesuccumb toour
moralindignation andproceedtocastigate
ortoenlighten the"backward" societies,
letustakeaquicklookattheritualistic
circumcision ofAmerican males.Granting
thatthefemalemutilations, asdescribed,
arefarmoredrasticthanourmalesurgery,
thereareconsiderably morecircumcised
American malesthanthetotalnumberof
circumcised andinfibulated females in
MricaandtheMiddleEast.orcourse,wecanalsorationalize our
genitalsurgery. However, wouldnotthe
editorial comment "thesemutilations are
donetohealthyorgansandare,therefore,
NOTethicalmedicalpractices -theyare
brutalsexualchiJdabuse" applyequallyto
ourritualasitdoestotheirs?It'snota
secretthatasaprophylactic measure, the
malecircumcision inAmerica hasnot
prevented venereal disease.Yet,theritual
goeson;theprocedure iscoveredbyhealth
(?)insurance.Justifiably concerned aboutthe
clitoridectomies andinfibulations onnon­
consenting children inMricaandthe
MiddleEast,hasHoskenaskedhowmany
oftheAmerican circumcised childrenhad
consented totheirmutilation? Howmany
American malesvoicedtheirinfonned
consent togettheirpenissurgically
trimmed? Underthesecircumstances
shouldwenotabolishourownritualof
routinecircumcision atthesametimethat
wewishtoconvince theMricans togiveup
theirrituals?Wouldwenotthenbeless
hypocritical?
Onbehalfofthepreservation offemale
clitorisandmalepreputium ...
VictorPenzer,M.D.,D.M.D.
197GrantAvenue
Newton, Massachusetts 02159
EditorialCommentbyRebaBe
Iwaswondering whowouldpickupon
thecircumcision ofvirtually allhospital­
bornAmerican males!Acenturyagothe
onlycircumcised peoplewereJewish;
nowadays mostmenare.
AJJabra-burning 60'sfeministIembrace
therighttointervene &confound
perpetuators ofsuchbody-altering abuses
(earlobe.piercingofgirlinfantsisanother),
HowcouldI,asaphilologically,
contemplative parent, permit these
enactments ofsuchcultish,archaicrituals
uponnon-<:onsenting children?
Iwrestled longwithbothrabbisandthe
all-male OBIGynoe tokeepintacttheson
borntomeandIwon.Oneoftheirfavorite
ripostt'!sonthissubjecthasbeen:whatdo
Iknow?Idon'tevenhavQtheequipment!
Sometimes Iponderonwhatmenthink
theyaredoinginthefieldofOBlgyno!
AsIdidn't"havetheequipment" and
Ben'sfather,himselfwholesomely intact,
wouldbeinabsentia duringthosevital
yearswhenourbody-sense iskeenly
developing, Iinterrogated himforhis
lifetimeexperiences. Hegavemesimple,
explicit infonnation aboutcleansing,
lubricating &flexing withparticular
emphasis uponthosehazardous years
whenskin&sinewseemtogrowatdifferent
paces(puberty). Ipasseditallontoour
",n.
245
